Prof. Dr.  Hikmet KELEŞ
o TÜMÖR BİYOLOJİSİ VE TERMİNOLOJİSİ 

1. Ders 15 –Tümör Biyolojisi ve Terminolojisi
• Konu:
– Neoplazikavramı
– İyihuyluvekötühuylutümörterminolojisi
– Diferansiyasyon, anaplazi, invazyon, metastaz
– Kanserepidemiyolojisiveçokaşamalıkarsinogenezçerçevesi
• Hedef:
– Klinikpatolojiyorumunazeminhazırlamak
2. NeoplaziveKanser–Giriş
•Neoplazi:
–“Yeni büyüme” anlamınagelir
•Neoplastik hücre:
–Normal büyümekontrolünedirençli
–Sürekliçoğalmaeğilimindedir
•Kanser:
–Kötühuylu(malign) neoplazmlarıntümüiçinkullanılangenelterim
–Büyümedüzenininderinbozukluğunuyansıtır
3.Kanser–TemelGenelİlkeler
•Kanser:
–DNA mutasyonlarınadayalıgenetikhastalıktır
•Mutasyonkaynakları:
–Çevreselkarsinojenler(kimyasallar, radyasyon, enfeksiyon)
–Hücreselsüreçlerin“hatapayı” (spontanmutasyon)
–Kalıtsal(germ hattı) mutasyonlar
•Epigenetik değişiklikler:
–DNA metilasyonu, histonmodifikasyonları
– Gen ekspresyonunumutasyonolmadandeğiştirir
4. Kanser–KlonalKökenveSeçilim
•Kanserhücrelerindekigenetikdeğişiklikler:
–Hücrebölünmesiilekalıtsalhale gelir
•Tümörlergenellikle:
–Tek birhücreninsoyundangelir(klonal)
•Darwinciseçilim:
–Büyümeveyasağkalımavantajısağlayanalt klonlar
–Zaman içindebaskınhale gelir→ tümörilerlemesi
5. KanserinAyırtEdiciÖzellikleri(Şekil6.15)
•Kanserhücreleritipikolarak:
–Büyümesinyallerindekendikendineyeterlilik
–Büyümeengelleyicisinyallereduyarsızlık
–Değişmişhücreselmetabolizma(Warburg etkisi)
–Apoptozdankaçınma
–Sınırsızçoğalmapotansiyeli(ölümsüzlük)
–Süreklianjiyogenez
–İstilavemetastaz
–Bağışıklıkgözetimindenkaçınma
•Bu özellikler:
–Genetikveepigenetik lezyonlarınortaksonucudur
HALLMARKS OF CANCER
As mentioned earlier, bona/uniFB01de cancer genes number in the hundreds,
at a minimum. While it is traditional to describe the function of cancer
genes one gene at a time, the blizzard of mutated genes emerging from
the sequencing of cancer genomes has blanketed the landscape and
revealed the limitations of trying to grasp the fundamental properties
of cancer gene by gene. A more tractable and conceptually satisfying
way to think about the biology of cancer is to consider the common
phenotypic and biologic properties of cancer cells. It appears that all
cancers display several fundamental changes in cell physiology,
which are considered the hallmarks of cancer. These changes,
illustrated inFig. 6.15, consist of the following:
•Self-suf/uniFB01ciency in growth signals
•Insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals
•Altered cellular metabolism
•Evasion of apoptosis
•Limitless replicative potential (immortality)
•Sustained angiogenesis
•Invasion and metastasis
•Evasion of immune surveillance
The acquisition of the genetic and epigenetic alterations that confer
these hallmarks may be accelerated bycancer-promoting in/uniFB02ammation
and bygenomic instability. These are considered enabling character-
istics because they aid and abet cellular transformation and subsequent
tumor progression.
Mutations in genes that regulate some or all these cellular traits are
seen in every cancer; accordingly, these traits form the basis of the
following discussion of the molecular origins of cancer. Of note, by
convention, gene symbols are italicized but their protein products are
not (e.g.,RBgene and RB protein,TP53and p53,MYCand MYC).
Self-Sufficiency in Growth Signals
The self-suf/uniFB01ciency in growth that characterizes cancer cells
generally stems from gain-of-function mutations that convert
proto-oncogenes to oncogenes.Oncogenes encode proteins called
oncoproteinsthat promote cell growth even in the absence of normal
growth-promoting signals. To appreciate how oncogenes drive inap-
propriate cell growth, it is helpful to review the sequence of events that
characterize normal cell proliferation. Under physiologic conditions,
signals that drive cell proliferation can be resolved into the following
steps:
1. Binding of a growth factor to its speci /uniFB01c receptor on the cell
membrane
2. Transient and limited activation of the growth factor receptor,
which in turn activates several signal-transducing proteins on the
inner lea/uniFB02et of the plasma membrane
3. Transmission of the transduced signal across the cytosol to the nu-
cleus by second messengers or a cascade of signal transduction
molecules
4. Induction and activation of nuclear regulatory factors that initiate
and regulate DNA transcription and thus the biosynthesis of other
cellular components that are needed for cell division, such as or-
ganelles, membrane components, and ribosomes
5. Entry and progression of the cell into the cell cycle, resulting ulti-
mately in cell division
The mechanisms that endow cancer cells with the ability to pro-
liferate can be grouped according to their role in the growth factor e
induced signal transduction cascade and cell cycle regulation. Indeed,
each one of the steps listed above is susceptible to perturbation in
cancer cells.
Growth Factors
Cancers may secrete their own growth factors or induce stromal
cells in the tumor microenvironment to produce growth factors.
Most growth factors are made by one cell type and act on a neigh-
boring cell of a different type to stimulate proliferation (paracrine
action). Normally, cells that produce the growth factor do not express
that factor’s receptor, preventing the formation of positive feedback
loops within the same cell. This“rule”is broken by certain cancers in
several ways.
•Some cancer cells acquire the ability to synthesize the same growth
factors to which they are responsive. For example, many glioblas-
tomas secrete platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and have am-
pli/uniFB01cations of the PDGF receptor gene, and many sarcomas secrete
transforming growth factor-a(TGF-a) and express its receptor.
Similar autocrine loops are fairly common in other types of cancer
as well.
•In other cancers, the tumor cells send signals that induce normal
cells in the supporting stroma to produce growth factors that feed-
back to stimulate tumor growth.
Growth Factor Receptors
Next in the sequence of progrowth signaling is growth factor receptors,
many of which have intrinsic kinase activity when activated by growth
factor binding.Many of the myriad growth factor receptors function
as oncoproteins when they are mutated or if they are overexpressed.
The best-documented examples of overexpression involve the
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor family. ERBB1, the EGF re-
ceptor, is overexpressed in 80% of squamous cell carcinomas of the
lung, 50% or more of glioblastomas, and 80% to 100% of epithelial
tumors of the head and neck. As mentioned earlier, the gene encoding a
related receptor, HER2 (ERBB2), is ampli/uniFB01ed in approximately 20% of
breast cancers and in a smaller fraction of adenocarcinomas of the lung,
ovary, stomach, and salivary glands. The signi/uniFB01cance of HER2 in the
pathogenesis of breast cancers is illustrated dramatically by the clinical
Sustaining
proliferative
signaling
Inducing
angiogenesis
Activating
invasion and
metastasis
Deregulating
cellular
energetics
Resisting
cell death
Enabling
replicative
immortality
Tumor-
promoting
inflammation
Evading growth
suppressors
Avoiding immune
destruction
Genomic instability
(mutator phenotype)
FIG. 6.15Eight cancer hallmarks and two enabling factors (genomic
instability and tumor-promoting in/uniFB02ammation). Most cancer cells acquire
these properties during their development, typically due to mutations in
critical genes. (From Hanahan D, Weinberg RA: Hallmarks of cancer: the
next generation.Cell144:646, 2011.)
200 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.15 Sekiz kanser 
özelliğive iki
etkinleştiricifaktör 
(genomikistikrarsızlık ve tümör 
gelişimini destekleyen inflamasyon). 
Çoğu kanser hücresi,
genellikle kritik 
genlerdeki mutasyonlar 
nedeniyle, gelişimleri 
sırasında bu özellikleri 
kazanır. (HanahanD, WeinbergRA'dan: Kanser özellikleri: yeni nesil. Cell 
144:646, 2011.)
of thyroid, appears to be encased by a capsule, but careful microscopic
examination reveals tiny tongues of tumor penetrating the margin and
in/uniFB01ltrating adjacent structures. This in/uniFB01ltrative mode of growth makes
it necessary to remove a wide margin of surrounding normal tissue
when complete excision of a malignant tumor is attempted. Patholo-
gists carefully examine the margins of resected tumors to ensure they
are devoid of cancer cells(clean surgical margins).
Metastasis
Metastasis is de/uniFB01ned by the spread of a tumor to sites that are
physically discontinuous with the primary tumor and is one of the
hallmarks of malignant tumors.The invasiveness of cancers permits
them to penetrate blood vessels, lymphatics, and body cavities,
providing opportunities for spread (Fig. 6.9). Overall, approximately
30% of patients with newly diagnosed solid tumors (excluding skin
cancers other than melanomas) present with clinically evident me-
tastases, and an additional 20% have occult metastases at the time of
diagnosis.
In general, large anaplastic neoplasms are more likely to have
metastasized at diagnosis, but there are exceptions. Extremely small
cancers may metastasize; conversely, some large and ominous-looking
lesions may not. While all malignant tumors can metastasize, some do
so very infrequently. For example, basal cell carcinomas of the skin
and most primary tumors of the central nervous system are locally
invasive but rarely metastasize. It is evident then that the properties of
local invasion and metastasis are separable.
A special circumstance involves so-called “blood cancers,”the
leukemias and lymphomas. These tumors are derived from blood-
forming cells that normally have the capacity to enter the blood-
stream and travel to distant sites; as a result, with only rare exceptions,
leukemias and lymphomas are assumed to be disseminated at diag-
nosis and are always considered to be malignant.
Malignant neoplasms disseminate by one of three pathways:
(1) seeding within body cavities; (2) lymphatic spread; or (3) he-
matogenous spread.Spread by seeding occurs when neoplasms
invade a body cavity. This mode of dissemination is particularly
A B
FIG. 6.6Carcinoma in situ. (A) Low-power view shows that the entire thickness of the epithelium is replaced
by atypical dysplastic cells. There is no orderly differentiation of squamous cells. The basement membrane is
intact, and there is no tumor in the subepithelial stroma. (B) High-power view of another region shows failure of
normal differentiation, marked nuclear and cellular pleomorphism, and numerous mitotic /uniFB01gures extending
toward the surface. The intact basement membrane(below)is not seen in this section.
A B
FIG. 6.7Fibroadenoma of the breast. (A) The tan, encapsulated tumor is sharply demarcated from sur-
rounding white breast tissue. (B) A microscopic view shows cords of entrapped dark staining epithelium
compressed by a loose/uniFB01brous stroma surrounded by bands of collagen. (B, From Fletcher CD: Diagnostic
Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Fig. 16.15A.)
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 191
ŞEKİL 6.7 Meme fibroadenomu. (A) Kahverengi, kapsüllü tümör, çevresindeki 
beyaz meme dokusundan keskin bir şekilde ayrılmıştır . (B) Mikroskopikgörünüm, 
gevşek lifli bir stromatarafından sıkıştırılmış ve kolajenbantlarıyla çevrili, koyu 
renkli boyanan epitel kordonlarını göstermektedir. (B, FletcherCD'den: Tümörlerin Tanısal Histopatolojisi, 5. baskı, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Şekil 16.15A.)
characteristic of cancers of the ovary, which often cover the peri-
toneal surfaces widely yet may not invade the underlying tissues. In
this instance, the ability to implant and grow at distant sites seems to
be separable from the capacity to invade. Neoplasms of the central
nervous system, such as a medulloblastoma or ependymoma, may
penetrate the cerebral ventricles and be carried by the cerebrospinal
/uniFB02uid until they implant on the meningeal surfaces surrounding the
brain or spinal cord.
Lymphatic spread is more typical of carcinomas, whereas he-
matogenous spread is favored by sarcomas. There are numerous
interconnections, however, between the lymphatic and vascular sys-
tems, so all forms of cancer may disseminate through either or both
systems. The pattern of lymph node involvement depends on the site
of the primary neoplasm and the pathways of local lymphatic
drainage. Lung carcinomas arising in the respiratory passages metas-
tasize/uniFB01rst to the regional bronchial lymph nodes and then to the
tracheobronchial and hilar nodes. Carcinoma of the breast usually
arises in the upper outer quadrant and spreads /uniFB01rst to the axillary
nodes; however, medial breast lesions may drain to the nodes along the
internal mammary artery. Thereafter, in both instances, the
supraclavicular and infraclavicular nodes may be seeded. In some
cases, cancer cells travel in lymphatic channels through the immedi-
ately proximal nodes only to be trapped in subsequent lymph nodes,
producing so-called“skip metastases.”The cells may also traverse all
the lymph nodes and reach the vascular compartment by way of the
thoracic duct.
A“sentinel lymph node”is the/uniFB01rst regional lymph node that
receives lymph/uniFB02ow from a primary tumor.It can be identi/uniFB01ed by
injection of dyes or radiolabeled tracers near the primary tumor. Bi-
opsy of sentinel lymph nodes allows determination of the extent of
tumor spread and can be used to plan treatment. Of note, although
enlargement of nodes near a primary neoplasm should raise concern
of metastatic spread, it does not always indicate cancerous involve-
ment. The necrotic cells of the neoplasm and tumor antigens often
evoke immunologic responses in draining nodes that lead to reactive
hyperplasia(lymphadenitis).Thus, biopsy is necessary to determine if
an enlarged lymph node is involved by tumor.
Hematogenous spread of cancers is most likely to occur through
the penetration of thin-walled veins instead of thick-walled arteries.
With venous invasion, the bloodborne cells often arrest in the /uniFB01rst
capillary bed they encounter. Since the portal system/uniFB02ows to the liver
and caval blood/uniFB02ows to the lungs, the liver and lungs are the most
frequent sites of hematogenous dissemination. Cancers arising in or-
gans near the vertebral column such as the thyroid and prostate often
embolize through the paravertebral plexus, possibly explaining the
proclivity of these cancers to spread to the spine. Other carcinomas,
particularly renal cell carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma, have a
propensity to grow within veins in a snakelike fashion, sometimes
extending up the inferior vena cava to the right side of the heart.
Remarkably, such intravenous growth may not be accompanied by
widespread dissemination.
In addition to the stepwise spread of cancers to the next draining
lymph node or capillary bed, other cancers frequently spread to
noncontiguous organs. For example, prostatic carcinoma preferentially
spreads to bone, bronchogenic carcinoma tends to involve the adrenal
glands and the brain, neuroblastoma spreads to the liver and bones,
and uveal melanoma spreads to the liver. Conversely, other tissues
such as skeletal muscle, although rich in capillaries, are rarely sites of
A B
FIG. 6.8Invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast. (A) Cut section shows that the stony-hard lesion is retracted
and in/uniFB01ltrates the surrounding breast substance. (B) A microscopic view shows invasion of breast stroma and
fat by nests and cords of tumor cells. Note the absence of a well-de /uniFB01ned capsule. (Courtesy of Dr. Susan
Lester, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.)
FIG. 6.9A liver studded with metastatic cancer.
192 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.8 Meme bezinin invazivduktalkarsinomu. (A) Kesit, taş gibi sert lezyonun 
içeri çekildiğini ve çevredeki meme dokusuna sızdığını göstermektedir. (B) 
Mikroskopikgörünüm, tümör hücrelerinin yuvaları ve kordonları tarafından 
meme stromasıve yağ dokusunun istilasını göstermektedir. İyi tanımlanmış bir 
kapsülün yokluğuna dikkat edin. (Dr. Susan Lester, BrighamandWomen’sHospital, Boston, Massachusetts'in izniyle.)
bene/uniFB01t derived from blocking the extracellular domain of this receptor
with anti-HER2 antibodies, an elegant example of“bench to bedside”
medicine. In other instances, the tyrosine kinase activity of the re-
ceptors is stimulated by point mutations or small insertions or deletions
that lead to subtle but functionally important changes in protein
structure, or by gene rearrangements that create fusion genes encoding
chimeric receptors. In each of these cases, the mutated receptors are
either constitutively active, delivering mitogenic signals to cells even in
the absence of growth factors, or are hyperresponsive to growth factors.
Downstream Signal-T ransducing Proteins
Cancer cells often acquire growth autonomy as a result of mutations
in genes that encode components of signaling pathways downstream
of growth factor receptors.The signaling proteins that couple growth
factor receptors to their nuclear targets are activated by ligand binding
to growth factor receptors. Two particularly important oncogenic
signaling molecules are RAS and ABL, which are discussed next.
RAS. RASis the most commonly mutated oncogene in human
tumors.Approximately 20% of all human tumors contain mutated
RASgenes, and the frequency is even higher in speci /uniFB01c cancers
(e.g., pancreatic adenocarcinoma). RAS is a member of a family of small
G proteins that bind guanosine nucleotides (guanosine triphosphate
[GTP] and guanosine diphosphate [GDP]). The activity of RAS is
regulated by the relative binding of GDP and GTP.
•Normally, RAS/uniFB02ips back and forth between an excited signal-
transmitting state and a quiescent state. RAS is inactive when
bound to GDP; stimulation of cells by growth factors such as
EGF and PDGF leads to exchange of GDP for GTP and subsequent
conformational changes that activate RAS (Fig. 6.16). This excited
signal-emitting state is short lived, however, because an intrinsic
guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity of activated RAS hy-
drolyzes GTP to GDP, releasing a phosphate group and returning
the protein to its quiescent GDP-bound state. The GTPase activity
of activated RAS is magni/uniFB01ed dramatically by a family of GTPase-
activating proteins (GAPs) that act as molecular brakes that pre-
vent uncontrolled RAS activation by favoring hydrolysis of GTP
to GDP.
•Activated RAS stimulates downstream regulators of proliferation by
several interconnected pathways that converge on the nucleus and
alter the expression of genes that regulate growth, such as MYC.
While details of the signaling cascades (some illustrated in
Fig. 6.16) downstream of RAS are not discussed here, an important
point is that mutational activation of these signaling intermediates
mimics the growth-promoting effects of activated RAS. For
GAP
PTEN PI3K
AKT
RAF
mTOR MAPK
Growth
factor
Phosphorylation
Adaptor
protein
Activation
GTPGDP
Activates
Increased transcription
of progrowth genes
• Progrowth
  metabolism
• Increased protein
  synthesis
• Cell cycle
  progression
CELL GROWTH
Active
RASInactive
RAS
Growth factor
receptor Farnesyl membrane anchor
Inactivation by
hydrolysis
FIG. 6.16Model for action of RAS. When a normal cell is stimulated through a growth factor receptor, inactive
(GDP-bound) RAS is activated to a GTP-bound state. This activation is normally transient, due to an intrinsic
GTPase activity in RAS and GTPase activating proteins (GAPs), which accelerate the breakdown of GTP. Acti-
vated RAS transduces proliferative, progrowth signals to the cell along two pathways: the so-called“RAF/MAP
kinase pathway”and the“PI3K/AKT kinase”pathway. There are several closely related members of each
component of the PI3K/AKT and RAF/MAP kinase pathways; one that is frequently mutated in cancer (BRAF) is
discussed in the text. GAPs and a protein called PTEN, an inhibitor of PI3 kinase, act as important brakes on
signaling downstream of activated RAS.GDP,Guanosine diphosphate;GTP,guanosine triphosphate;MAPK,
mitogen-activated protein kinase;mTOR,mammalian target of rapamycin;PI3K,phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 201
ŞEKİL 6.16 RAS'ınetki modeli. Normal bir hücre 
büyüme faktörü reseptörü aracılığıyla 
uyarıldığında, inaktif(GDP'yebağlı) RAS, GTP'ye
bağlı bir duruma aktiveedilir . Bu aktivasyon, 
RAS'takiiçsel bir GTPazaktivitesi ve GTP'nin
parçalanmasını hızlandıran GTPazaktive edici 
proteinler (GAP'ler) nedeniyle normalde geçicidir . 
Aktive edilmiş RAS, iki yol boyunca hücreye 
proliferatif, büyüme yanlısı sinyaller iletir: 
"RAF/MAP kinazyolu" ve "PI3K/AKT kinaz" yolu. 
PI3K/AKT ve RAF/MAP kinazyollarının her bir 
bileşeninin birkaç yakın ilişkili üyesi vardır; 
kanserde sıklıkla mutasyona uğrayan bir tanesi 
(BRAF)metinde tartışılmaktadır. GAP'lerve PI3 
kinazinhibitörü olan PTEN adlı bir protein, aktive 
edilmiş RAS'ınaşağı akışındaki sinyallemede
önemli frenler görevi görür. GDP , Guanozin
difosfat; GTP , guanozintrifosfat; MAPK, mitojenle
aktive olan protein kinaz; mTOR, memeli rapamisin
hedefi; PI3K, fosfatidilinositol3-kinaz.
genetic derangement is too severe to be repaired, the cells either un-
dergo apoptosis or enter a nonreplicative state called senescenced
primarily through p53-dependent mechanisms (see later).
Enforcing the cell-cycle checkpoints is the job of CDK inhibitors
(CDKIs); they accomplish this by modulating CDK-cyclin complex
activity. Defective CDKI checkpoint proteins allow cells with damaged
DNA to divide, resulting in mutated daughter cells at risk for malig-
nant transformation. There are several different CDKIs:
•One family of CDKIsdcomposed of three proteins called p21, p27,
and p57dbroadly inhibits multiple CDKs
•Another family of CDKIs has selective effects on cyclin CDK4
and cyclin CDK6; these proteins are called p15, p16, p18, and p19
An equally important aspect of cell growth and division is the
biosynthesis of other cellular components needed to make two
daughter cells, such as membranes and organelles. Thus, when growth
factor receptor signaling stimulates cell-cycle progression, it also ac-
tivates events that promote changes in cellular metabolism that sup-
port growth. Chief among these is the Warburg effect (discussed later),
which is marked by increased cellular uptake of glucose and glutamine,
increased glycolysis, and (counterintuitively) decreased oxidative
phosphorylation.
Dysregulation of the Cell Cycle in Cancer Cells.Of the two main
cell cycle checkpoints, the G1-S checkpoint is particularly likely to be
lost in cancer cells.Once cells pass through the G1/S checkpoint, they
are generally committed to undergo cell division, and thus cells with
defects in this checkpoint proliferate excessively. Indeed, virtually all
cancers appear to harbor genetic lesions that disable the G 1/S check-
point, causing cells to continually reenter the S phase. For unclear
reasons, particular lesions vary widely in frequency across tumor types,
but they fall into two major categories.
•Gain-of-function mutations involving CDK4 or D cyclins. Changes
increasing the expression of cyclin D or CDK4 are common events
in neoplastic transformation. The cyclin D genes are overexpressed
in many cancers, including those affecting the breast, esophagus,
and liver, as well as a subset of lymphomas and plasma cell tumors.
Ampli/uniFB01cation of theCDK4gene occurs in melanomas, sarcomas,
and glioblastomas. Mutations affecting the genes encoding cyclins
B and E and other CDKs also occur, but they are much less frequent
than those affecting the genes encoding D cyclins and CDK4.
Cyclin
D
Cyclin
D
Cyclin
E
Cyclin
A
Cyclin
A
Cyclin
B
Cyclin
B
CDK4 CDK6
CDK2
CDK2
CDK1
CDK1
p16
p15
p18p19 CDK inhibitors p21p27p57
 CDK inhibitors 
p21
p27
p57
 CDK inhibitors 
p21
p27
p57
 CDK inhibitors 
S
G2
G1
M
P
p21
p27
p57
    CDK inhibitors 
RB RB
FIG. 6.17Role of cyclins, CDKs, and CDK inhibitors in regulating the cell cycle.Shaded arrowsrepresent the
phases of the cell cycle during which speci/uniFB01c cyclin-CDK complexes are active. Cyclin D-CDK4, cyclin D-CDK6,
and cyclin E-CDK2 promote passage through the G1-S checkpoint by phosphorylating the RB protein (RB-P).
Cyclin A-CDK2 and cyclin A-CDK1 are active in S phase. Cyclin B-CDK1 is essential for the transition from G2to
M phase. Two families of CDK inhibitors can block the activity of CDKs and progression through the cell cycle.
The inhibitors, p15, p16, p18, and p19, act on cyclin D-CDK4 and cyclin D-CDK6. Inhibitors belonging to the
other family, p21, p27, and p57, can inhibit all CDKs. CDK, Cyclin dependent kinase.
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 203
ŞEKİL 6.17 Siklinlerin, CDK'larınve CDK 
inhibitörlerinin hücre döngüsünün 
düzenlenmesindeki rolü. Gölgeli oklar, belirli 
siklin-CDK komplekslerinin aktif olduğu hücre 
döngüsü evrelerini temsil eder . Siklin D-CDK4, 
siklin D-CDK6 ve siklin E-CDK2, RB proteinini 
(RB-P) fosforlayarakG1-S kontrol noktasından 
geçişi teşvik eder . Siklin A-CDK2 ve siklin A-
CDK1, S fazında aktiftir . Siklin B-CDK1, G2'den 
M fazına geçiş için gereklidir . İki CDK inhibitör 
ailesi, CDK'larınaktivitesini ve hücre 
döngüsündeki ilerlemeyi engelleyebilir.
p15, p16, p18 ve p19 inhibitörleri, siklin D-
CDK4 ve siklin D-CDK6 üzerinde etki gösterir . 
Diğer aileye ait inhibitörler olan p21, p27 ve 
p57, tüm CDK'larıinhibeedebilir . CDK, Siklin 
bağımlı kinazanlamına gelir .
6. Terminoloji–TemelTanımlar
•Neoplazi:
–Yeni, otonomhücreçoğalması
•Tümör:
–Yaygınklinikterim; her neoplazmiçinkullanılır
•Onkoloji:
–Tümörlerinbilimselveklinikincelenmesi
•Parankim:
–Neoplazmındönüşmüş, neoplastik hücrekomponenti
•Stroma:
–Konak kökenlidestekdokusu:
• Bağdokusu, damarlar, inflamatuvarhücreler
7. Benign (İyiHuylu) Neoplazm–Tanım
•Mikroskopikvemakroskopikolarak:
–Lokalizekalmaeğiliminde
–Çevredokularıistilaetmez
–Uzakmetastazyapmaz
•Tedavi:
–Çoğucerrahiolaraktamamençıkarılabilir
–Genellikleiyileştirilebilir
•Ancak:
–Kritikbölgedebüyürseciddimorbiditevemortaliteyeyolaçabilir
• Örn. beyin, büyükdamar, safrayolu
8. Malign (KötüHuylu) Neoplazm–Tanım
•Özellikler:
–Lokalinvazyon
–Uzakmetastazyapmakapasitesi
•Klinik:
–Tedaviedilmezsegenellikleölümcüldür
•Terim:
–“Kanser” = tümmalign neoplazmlar
•Agresiflik:
–Değişkendir:
• Bazıkanserleryavaşseyreder
• Bazılarıhızlıilerlerama tedaviyeduyarlıdır
9. Tümör–ParankimveStroma
•Parankim:
–Neoplastik hücreler
–Tümörünbiyolojikdavranışınıbelirler
–Tümörünadlandırılmasıparankimegöreyapılır
•Stroma:
–Bağdokusu, damarlar, inflamatuvarhücreler
–Beslenmevekandesteğisağlar
–Tümörhücreleriileikiyönlüsinyalalışverişiyapar
10. Benign Tümörlerinİsimlendirilmesi
•Mezenkimaldokukökenlibenign tümörler:
–Hücretipinegöre+ “-oma”son eki
–Örnekler:
•Fibroma→ fibroblastkökenli
•Kondroma→ kıkırdakhücrekökenli
•Lipoma→ yağhücresikökenli
•İskeletkası→ rabdomyoma
•Düzkas → leiomyoma
11. Benign EpitelialTümörlerinİsimlendirilmesi
•Adenom:
–Bez yapılarıoluşturan
–Veyabezdentüreyenbenign epitelyal tümör
•Papillom:
–Mikroskopikveyamakroskopikparmakbenzeriçıkıntılar
–Yüzeyepitelyal tümörü(eŞekil6.1)
•Polip:
–Mukozanınlümeniçineprotrüdeolduğukitle
–Benignveyamalignolabilir
•Kistadenom:
–Kistikbenign epitelyal tümör
–Sıklıklaovaryumda(Bölüm17)
eFIG. 6.1Intraductal papilloma of breast. The papillary fronds have a /uniFB01brovascular core and are lined by
epithelium. (From Fletcher CD: Diagnostic Histopathology of Tumors, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier,
Fig. 16.24.)
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 187.e1
eŞekil6.1 Memenin intraduktalpapilloması. Papillerdalların geniş damarlı bir 
stromasıvardır ve epitel ile kaplıdır. (FletcherCD: Tümörlerin Tanısal Histopatolojisi, 5. baskı, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Şekil 16.24'ten alınmıştır.)
clinical features of neoplasia are also discussed. Before turning to the
de/uniFB01ning characteristics of cancer cells and the mechanisms of
carcinogenesis, we/uniFB01rst summarize the fundamental and shared fea-
tures of all cancers:
•Cancer is a genetic disorder caused by DNA mutations. Patho-
genic mutations may occur due to exposure to mutagens, may
occur spontaneously due to error-prone processes in cells, or
may be inherited. In addition, cancers frequently show epigenetic
alterations (e.g., altered DNA methylation and histone modi /uniFB01ca-
tion). In concert, these genetic and epigenetic abnormalities alter
the expression or function of key genes that regulate fundamental
cellular processes, such as growth, survival, and senescence.
•Genetic alterations in cancer cells are heritable, being passed to
daughter cells upon cell division; as a result, cells harboring
these mutations are subject to Darwinian selection (survival of
the/uniFB01ttest).Cells bearing mutations that provide a growth or sur-
vival advantage outcompete their neighbors and thus come to
dominate the population. At the time of tumor initiation, these se-
lective advantages are conferred on a single cell and, as a result, in-
dividual tumors areclonal(i.e., the progeny of one cell). However,
beyond the point of initiation Darwinian selection continues to
shape the clonal evolution of cancers by favoring the proliferation
of genetically distinct subclones with more aggressive characteris-
tics, a concept referred to astumor progression.
•Mutations and epigenetic alterations impart to cancer cells a set
of properties that are referred to collectively ascancer hallmarks.
These properties produce the cellular phenotypes that dictate the
natural history of cancers as well as their response to various ther-
apies. The molecular underpinnings of each hallmark of cancer are
discussed later.
Basic research has elucidated many of the cellular and molecular
abnormalities that give rise to cancer and govern its behavior. These
insights are in turn leading to a revolution in the diagnosis and
treatment of cancer, an evolving triumph of biomedical science.
NOMENCLATURE
Neoplasiameans“new growth,”and neoplastic cells are said to be
“transformed”because they replicate incessantly as a result of resistance
to the regulatory in/uniFB02uences that control normal cells. Neoplasms
therefore enjoy a degree of autonomy, but some important de-
pendencies remain. All neoplasms, for example, depend on the host for
their nutrition and blood supply, and neoplasms derived from hormone
responsive tissues often require endocrine support. As we will discuss,
such dependencies can sometimes be exploited therapeutically.
In common medical usage, a neoplasm is often referred to as a
tumor,and the study of tumors is called oncology(fromoncos,“tu-
mor,”andlogos,“study of”). Tumors are generally categorized as
benign or malignant, an assessment that is central to the accurate
prediction of a tumor’s behavior and prognosis.
•A tumor is said to bebenignwhen its microscopic and gross charac-
teristics indicate that it will remain localized and is amenable to local
surgical removal.Patients with benign tumors can generally be cured
of their disease. However, not all benign tumors are easily excised,
and some produce signi/uniFB01cant morbidity or are even lethal, particu-
larly if they are located near a vital structure or organ.
•Malignant, as applied to a neoplasm, implies that the lesion may be
locally invasive and has the capacity to spread to distant sites
(metastasize).Malignant tumors are collectively referred to ascan-
cers,derived from the Latin word for“crab,”as they in/uniFB01ltrate and
seize upon normal tissues in an obstinate manner, similar to a
crab’s behavior. Not all cancers pursue an aggressive course, and,
paradoxically, some of the most aggressive are also highly curable,
but the designationmalignantconstitutes a red/uniFB02ag.
All tumors, benign and malignant, have two basic components: (1)
parenchyma,made up of transformed or neoplastic cells and (2)
stroma,the supporting host-derived, nonneoplastic connective tissue,
in/uniFB02ammatory cells, and blood vessels. Even leukemias, neoplasms in
which the malignant cells circulate in the blood (Chapter 10), depend
on stromal interactions to support the growth of the tumor cells. The
parenchyma of the neoplasm largely determines its biologic behavior,
and it is this component from which the tumor derives its name.
However, the stroma is crucial to the growth of the neoplasm, since it
provides the blood supply. Moreover, stromal cells and tumor cells
carry on a two-way conversation that in /uniFB02uences the behavior and
growth pattern of tumor cells.
Benign Tumors
In general, benign tumors are designated by attaching the suf/uniFB01x-omato
the cell type from which the tumor arises. For example, a benign tumor
of/uniFB01broblasts is a/uniFB01broma; a benign cartilaginous tumor is achondroma.
More complex nomenclature is used for benign epithelial tumors.
•Adenomais applied to most benign epithelial neoplasms, including
those that produce glandlike structures and those that do not.
•Papillomarefers to a benign epithelial neoplasm that produces
microscopic or macroscopic/uniFB01ngerlike fronds (eFig. 6.1).
•Polyprefers to a mass that projects above a mucosal surface to form
a macroscopically visible structure (Fig. 6.1). Although this term is
commonly used for benign tumors, some malignant tumors may
grow as polyps, and other polyps (such as nasal polyps) are not
neoplastic but in/uniFB02ammatory in origin.
•Cystadenomarefers to hollow cystic mass; these are most common
in the ovary (Chapter 17).
Malignant Tumors
The nomenclature of malignant tumors essentially follows that of
benign tumors, with certain additions and exceptions. Although the
nomenclature of neoplasms is complex (and sometimes inconsistent),
students must be familiar with it because it is the means by which a
tumor’s nature and signi/uniFB01cance are conveyed by physicians.
FIG. 6.1Colonic polyps. Several pedunculated “velvety”polyps are
seen in this segment of colon.
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 187
ŞEKİL 6.1 Kolon polipleri. Kolonun bu bölümünde birkaç saplı “kadifemsi” polip 
görülmektedir.
eFIG. 6.2Benign cystic teratoma (dermoid cyst) of the ovary. A cystic space is lined by benign squamous
epithelium underlaid by soft tissue containing hair follicles and sebaceous glands. (From Fletcher CD: Diag-
nostic Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Fig. 13A.83.)
A
B
eFIG. 6.3Benign tumors. (A) An intramuscular lipoma, in which neoplastic well-differentiated adipocytes
splay apart normal skeletal muscle cells. (B) A chondroma composed of disorganized but benign-appearing
chondrocytes. (From Fletcher CD:Diagnostic Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier,
Fig. 24.1 and Fig. 25.21.)
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 188.e1
eŞEKİL6.3 İyi huylu tümörler. (A) 
Neoplastik, iyi diferansiyeolmuş yağ 
hücrelerinin normal iskelet kası 
hücrelerini birbirinden ayırdığı bir kas içi 
lipom.
(B) Düzensiz ancak iyi huylu görünen 
kondrositlerdenoluşan bir kondrom. (FletcherCD: 
Tümörlerin Tanısal Histopatolojisi, 5. baskı, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Şekil 24.1 ve Şekil 25.21'den.)
12. Malign MezenkimalTümörler–Sarkom
•“Sarkom”:
–Mezenkimaldokudantüreyenmalign tümörler
•Örnekler:
–Liposarkom:
• Yağbenzerihücrelerdenoluşur
–Kondrosarkom:
• Kıkırdakhücrelerinebenzerhücrelerdenoluşur
–Osteosarkom, rabdomyosarkom, leiomyosarkom
•Kan hücresineoplazmları:
–Lösemi, lenfoma(Bölüm10)
13. Malign EpitelialTümörler–Karsinom
•“Karsinom”:
–Epitel hücrekökenlimalign neoplazm
–Kökenembriyoniktabakasındanbağımsız:
• Ektoderm, endodermveyamezodermkökenliepitel
•Alt tipler:
–Adenokarsinom:
• Glandülerfarklılaşmagösterir
–Skuamözhücrelikarsinom:
• Skuamözfarklılaşmagösterir
•Örnek:
–Böbrekhücrelikarsinom, hepatosellülerkarsinom
cells are much less likely to have specialized functional activities.
For example, benign neoplasms and even well-differentiated cancers of
endocrine glands frequently elaborate the hormones characteristic of
their cell of origin. Similarly, well-differentiated squamous cell carci-
nomas produce keratin (seeFig. 6.3), just as well-differentiated he-
patocellular carcinomas secrete bile. In other instances, unanticipated
functions emerge. Some cancers express fetal proteins not produced by
comparable cells in the adult. Cancers of nonendocrine origin may
also produce so-called“ectopic hormones.”For example, certain lung
carcinomas secrete adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), para-
thyroid hormoneelike hormone, insulin, glucagon, and others. More
is said about these so-called“paraneoplastic”phenomena later.
Also relevant in the discussion of differentiation and anaplasia is
dysplasia,referring to disorderly proliferation.Dysplastic epithelium
is recognized by loss of uniformity of individual cells and disturbed
architectural orientation.Dysplastic cells exhibit pleomorphism and
often possess abnormally large, hyperchromatic nuclei. Mitotic/uniFB01gures
are more abundant than usual and frequently appear in the super/uniFB01cial
epithelium, an abnormal location. In addition, there is architectural
disarray. For example, the usual progressive maturation of tall cells in
the basal layer to /uniFB02attened squames on the surface of squamous
epithelium may be lost, such that the epithelium consists of a disor-
dered mixture of dark basal-appearing cells. When dysplastic changes
are severe and involve the entire thickness of the epithelium, the lesion
is referred to as carcinoma in situ,a preinvasive stage of cancer
(Fig. 6.6).
It is important to appreciate that dysplasia is not synonymous with
cancer. Mild to moderate dysplasia sometimes regresses completely,
particularly if inciting causes are removed. However, dysplasia is often
present adjacent to frankly malignant neoplasms (e.g., in lung carci-
nomas arising in the context of cigarette smoking) and as a general
rule marks a tissue as being at increased risk for cancer development.
Local Invasion
The growth of cancers is accompanied by progressive in /uniFB01ltration,
invasion, and destruction of surrounding tissues, whereas most
benign tumors grow as cohesive expansile masses that remain
localized.Because benign tumors grow and expand slowly, they
usually develop a rim of compressed /uniFB01brous tissue, often called the
capsule (Fig. 6.7). The capsule consists of extracellular matrix that is
deposited by stromal cells such as/uniFB01broblasts, which may be activated
by the mechanical stress created by compression of normal tissue by
the expanding tumor. Encapsulation creates a tissue plane that makes
the tumor discrete, moveable (non /uniFB01xed), and readily excisable by
surgical enucleation. However, not all benign neoplasms are encap-
sulated. For example, uterine leiomyoma is discretely demarcated from
the surrounding smooth muscle by a zone of compressed and atten-
uated normal myometrium but lacks a capsule. A few benign tumors
are neither encapsulated nor discretely de/uniFB01ned; lack of demarcation is
particularly likely in benign vascular neoplasms such as hemangiomas,
which may be dif/uniFB01cult to excise. These exceptions are pointed out only
to emphasize that, although encapsulation is the rule in benign tu-
mors, the lack of a capsule does not mean a tumor is malignant.
Next to the development of metastases, invasiveness is the
feature that most reliably distinguishes cancers from benign tumors
(Fig. 6.8).Cancers lack well-de/uniFB01ned capsules. There are instances in
which a slowly growing malignant tumor, such as follicular carcinoma
FIG. 6.3Well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Note
the terminal differentiation of the tumor cells, which are forming keratin
pearls. (From Fletcher CD:Diagnostic Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5,
Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Fig. 23.42.)
FIG. 6.4Pleomorphic malignant tumor (rhabdomyosarcoma). Note the
marked variation in cell and nuclear sizes, the hyperchromatic nuclei, and
the presence of tumor giant cells. (Courtesy of Dr. Trace Worrell,
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
School, Dallas, Texas.)
FIG. 6.5High-power detailed view of anaplastic tumor cells shows
cellular and nuclear variation in size and shape. The prominent cell in the
center/uniFB01eld has an abnormal tripolar spindle.
190 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.3 Derinin iyi diferansiyeolmuş skuamözhücreli karsinomu. Tümör 
hücrelerinin terminal diferansiyasyonunadikkat edin; bu hücreler keratinincileri 
oluşturmaktadır . (FletcherCD: Tümörlerin Tanısal Histopatolojisi, 5. baskı, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Şekil 23.42'den alınmıştır.)
14. TerminolojideÖnemliİstisnalar
•Malign olup“-oma”son ekitaşıyanlar:
–Lenfoma
–Melanom
–Mezotelyoma
–Seminoma
•Bu terimlertarihselolarakyerleşmiştir
•Klinikpratikte:
–Bu tümörlerinher zaman malignkabuledildiğiunutulmamalıdır
15. Mikst(Karma)TümörlerveTeratomlar
•Karma (mixed) tümör:
–Tek klonalhücredentüreyen
–Birdenfazladiferansiyasyonhattıgösteren
•Örnek:
–Tükürükbezininpleomorfikadenomu:
• Fibromiksoidstroma içinde
• Epitel adacıkları, kıkırdakveyakemikodakları(Şekil6.2)
•Teratom:
–Totipotent germ hücrekökenli
–Birdenfazlagerm tabakasındantüreyendokular:
• Epitel, kas, kemik, nöraldokuvb. (eŞekil6.2)
–Ensıkovaryumvetestiste
•Malignant neoplasms arising in“solid”mesenchymal tissue or its
derivatives are namedsarcomas,whereas those arising from the
cells of the blood are called leukemiasorlymphomas.Sarcomas
are designated based on their principal cell type. Thus,
a malignant neoplasm comprising fatlike cells is a liposarcoma,
and a malignant neoplasm composed of chondrocyte-like cells is
achondrosarcoma.
•Although epithelia may be derived from all three germ cell layers,
malignant neoplasms of epithelial cells are called carcinomas
regardless of the tissue of origin. Thus, malignant neoplasms
arising in the renal tubular epithelium (mesoderm), the skin (ecto-
derm), or lining epithelium of the gut (endoderm) are all consid-
ered carcinomas.
•Carcinomas are subdivided further. Carcinomas that grow in a
glandular pattern are calledadenocarcinomas,and those that pro-
duce squamous cells are called squamous cell carcinomas.Some-
times the tissue or organ of origin is speci /uniFB01ed, as in the
designation of renal cell carcinoma. Tumors may show little or
no differentiation; these are referred to as poorly differentiatedor
undifferentiated carcinoma.
The neoplastic cells in a tumor, whether benign or malignant,
usually resemble each other, consistent with their origin from a single
transformed progenitor cell. In some unusual instances, however, the
tumor cells undergo divergent differentiation, creating so-called
“mixed tumors.”Mixed tumors are clonal, but the progenitor cell in
such tumors has the capacity to differentiate along more than one
lineage. One example is mixed tumor of the salivary gland, commonly
referred to aspleomorphic adenoma. This benign tumor has epithelial
components dispersed throughout a/uniFB01bromyxoid stroma, sometimes
harboring islands of cartilage or bone (Fig. 6.2).Teratomais a special
type of mixed tumor that contains recognizable mature or immature
cells or tissues derived from more than one germ cell layer, and
sometimes all three. Teratomas originate from totipotent germ cells,
which normally reside in the ovary and testis and may be present in
midline embryonic rests. Germ cells have the capacity to differentiate
into any of the cell types found in the adult body; therefore, they may
give rise to neoplasms that contain elements resembling bone,
epithelium, muscle, fat, nerve, and other tissues, mixed together in a
helter-skelter fashion (eFig. 6.2).
The speci/uniFB01c names of the more common neoplasms are presented
inTable 6.1. Some glaring inconsistencies may be noted. For example,
the termslymphoma, mesothelioma, melanoma,andseminomaare
used for malignant neoplasms. Unfortunately for students, these ex-
ceptions are/uniFB01rmly entrenched in medical terminology. There are also
other instances of confusing terminology:
•Hamartomais a mass of disorganized tissue resembling the
involved site, such as the lung or the liver. Although historically
thought of as developmental malformations, hamartomas have
clonal chromosomal aberrations that are acquired through somatic
mutations and are best considered unusual benign neoplasms.
•Choristomais a congenital anomaly consisting of a heterotopic nest
of cells. For example, a small nodule of pancreatic tissue may be
found in the submucosa of the stomach, duodenum, or small intes-
tine. The designation -oma,connoting a neoplasm, gives these le-
sions an undeserved gravity, as they are usually trivial.
CHARACTERISTICS OF BENIGN AND MALIGNANT
NEOPLASMS
Three features can be used to distinguish between most benign and
malignant tumors: differentiation and anaplasia; local invasion;
and metastasis.In general, rapid growth also signi/uniFB01es malignancy, but
some malignant tumors grow slowly and as a result growth rate is not
a reliable discriminator. Although some neoplasms defy easy charac-
terization, in most instances the determination of benign versus ma-
lignant is made with remarkable accuracy using long-established
criteria.
Differentiation and Anaplasia
Differentiation refers to the extent to which neoplasms resemble
their cells of origin; lack of differentiation is called anaplasia.In
general, benign neoplasms are composed of well-differentiated cells
that closely resemble their normal counterparts. A lipoma is made up
of mature fat cells laden with cytoplasmic lipid vacuoles, and a
chondroma is made up of mature cartilage cells that synthesize
cartilaginous matrixdevidence of morphologic and functional dif-
ferentiation (eFig. 6.3). In well-differentiated benign tumors, mitoses
are usually rare and are of normal con/uniFB01guration.
By contrast, most malignant neoplasms exhibit morphologic
alterations that demonstrate their malignant nature. In well-
differentiated cancers (Fig. 6.3), these features may be quite subtle.
For example, well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the thyroid gland
may contain normal-appearing follicles, its malignant potential being
revealed only by invasion into adjacent tissues or metastasis. In
addition, cancers may induce stromal responses that are not seen in
benign tumors. For example, certain cancers induce a dense, abun-
dant/uniFB01brous stroma(desmoplasia),making them hard,“scirrhous”
tumors.
Tumors composed of undifferentiated cells are said to be
anaplastic,a feature that is a reliable indicator of malignancy. The
termanaplasialiterally means “backward formation”dimplying
dedifferentiation, or loss of the structural and functional differentia-
tion of normal cells. In some instances, dedifferentiation of apparently
mature cells occurs during carcinogenesis. However, other cancers
arise from stem cells in tissues; in these tumors, failure of
FIG. 6.2Mixed tumor of the parotid gland. Areas containing nests of
epithelial cells (on the left) and myxoid stroma forming cartilage and bone
(an unusual feature, on the right) are present in this/uniFB01eld. (From Fletcher
CD:Diagnostic Histopathology of Tumors, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2021,
Elsevier, Fig. 7.11.)
188 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.2 Parotisbezinin miks(karışık) tümörü. Bu alanda epitel hücre yuvaları 
(solda) ve kıkırdakve kemik oluşturan miksoidstroma(alışılmadık bir özellik, 
sağda) içeren alanlar mevcuttur . (FletcherCD: Tümörlerin Tanısal Histopatolojisi, 5. baskı, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Şekil 7.11'den.)
eFIG. 6.2Benign cystic teratoma (dermoid cyst) of the ovary. A cystic space is lined by benign squamous
epithelium underlaid by soft tissue containing hair follicles and sebaceous glands. (From Fletcher CD: Diag-
nostic Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Fig. 13A.83.)
A
B
eFIG. 6.3Benign tumors. (A) An intramuscular lipoma, in which neoplastic well-differentiated adipocytes
splay apart normal skeletal muscle cells. (B) A chondroma composed of disorganized but benign-appearing
chondrocytes. (From Fletcher CD:Diagnostic Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier,
Fig. 24.1 and Fig. 25.21.)
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 188.e1
eŞekil6.2 Yumurtalıkta iyi huylu kistikteratom(dermoidkist). Kistikboşluk, kıl 
foliküllerive yağ bezleri içeren yumuşak doku ile kaplı iyi huylu skuamözepitel ile 
çevrilidir . (FletcherCD: Tümörlerin Tanısal Histopatolojisi, 5. baskı, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Şekil 13A.83'ten.)
16. HamartomveKhoristom
•Hamartom:
–Bulunduğuorgana aitolgundokuların
–Düzensiz, lokalizekitlesi
–Gelişimselmalformasyon sanılsada:
• Somatikmutasyoniçerebilir
• Benign neoplazmolarakkabuledilir
•Khoristom:
–Heterotopik(ektopik) olgundokuadacıkları
–Örn. mideduvarındapankreasdokusu
–Genellikleklinikaçıdanönemsizdir
Tablo6.1. SeçilmişTümörlerinAdlandırılması(Bölüm1/3)
Dokukökeni Benign(iyi huylu) Malign (kötü huylu)
Başlıcatekbirhücretipindenoluşantümörler
Bağdokusuvetürevleri
Bağdokusu Fibrom Fibrosarkom
Yağdokusu Lipom Liposarkom
Kıkırdak Kondrom Kondrosarkom
Kemik Osteom Osteosarkom
Endotelveilişkilihücretipleri
Kan damarları Hemanjiom Anjiosarkom
Lenfdamarları Lenfanjiom Lenfangiosarkom
Mezotelyum Mezotelyoma Mezotelyoma(malign)
Beyinzarları Meningiom İnvazivmeningiom
Kan hücreleriveilişkilihücretipleri
Hematopoietik hücreler – Lösemiler
Lenfoiddoku – Lenfomalar
Kas
Düzkas Leiomyom Leiomyosarkom
Çizgilikas Rabdomyom Rabdomyosarkom
Tablo6.1. SeçilmişTümörlerinAdlandırılması(Bölüm2/3)
Dokukökeni Benign (iyihuylu) Malign (kötü huylu)
Deri
Çok katlı yassı epitel Skuamözhücrelipapillom Skuamözhücreli(epidermoid) karsinom
Derinin veya adnekslerin bazal hücreleri – Bazalhücrelikarsinom
Melanosittümörleri Nevüs Melanom
Bezlerinveyaduktuslarınepitel döşemesi
– Adenom Adenokarsinom
– Papillom Papillerkarsinomlar
– Kistadenom Kistadenokarsinom
Akciğer Bronşiyal adenom Bronkojenikkarsinom
Böbrek Renal tübüler adenom Renal hücrelikarsinom
Karaciğer Hepatik adenom Hepatoselülerkarsinom
Mesane Ürotelyal papillom Ürotelyalkarsinom
Plasenta Hidatidiform mol Koriokarsinom
Testis – Seminom; Embriyonelkarsinom
Over Serözkistadenom, müsinözkistadenom Serözkistadenokarsinom, müsinöz
kistadenokarsinom
Tablo6.1. SeçilmişTümörlerinAdlandırılması(Bölüm3/3)
Dokukökeni Benign (iyi huylu) Malign (kötü huylu)
Normaldeaynıgerm tabakasındangelişenbirdenfazlahücretipindenoluşantümörler
Tükrük bezleri Pleomorfik adenom (mikst tükrük 
bezi tümörü)
Malign mikst tükrük bezi tümörü
Böbrek taslağı (renal anlage) – Wilms tümörü
Normaldebirdenfazlagerm tabakasındangelişenbirdenfazlahücretipindenoluşantümörler
Gonadlarda veya embriyonik artıklardaki 
totipotent hücreler
Matür teratoma, dermoid kist İmmatürteratoma, teratokarsinom
17. DiferansiyasyonveAnaplazi–Tanımlar
•Diferansiyasyon:
–Tümörhücrelerinin
–Kökenaldığınormal hücreyebenzerlikderecesi
•Anaplazi:
–Diferansiyasyonkaybı
–Hücrelerinnormal morfolojivefonksiyonlarınıyitirmesi
–Maligniteiçingüvenilirbirbelirteç
18. BenignveMalign TümörlerdeDiferansiyasyon
•Benign neoplazmlar:
–Genellikleiyidiferansiyehücrelerdenoluşur
–Normal karşılıklarınamorfolojikvefonksiyonelolarakbenzer
–Örnek:
•Lipom→ olgunyağhücreleri
•Kondrom→ olgunkondrositler
•Malign neoplazmlar:
–İyi, ortaveyaazdiferansiyeolabilir
–Bazılarıtamamenanaplastikhücrelerdenoluşur
19. Anaplazi–MorfolojikÖzellikler(Şekil6.4, 6.5)
•Hücreselvenükleerpleomorfizm:
–Hücreveçekirdekboyut/şekilçeşitliliği
•Nükleerözellikler:
–Hiperkromazi(koyuboyanma)
–Büyümüşnükleus
–Yükseknükleus/sitoplazmaoranı(≈1:1)
•Tümördev hücreleri:
–Tek veyaçoksayıdadev çekirdeğesahip
•Mitozlar:
–Sıkveatipik:
• Çokkutuplu, anormal figürler
cells are much less likely to have specialized functional activities.
For example, benign neoplasms and even well-differentiated cancers of
endocrine glands frequently elaborate the hormones characteristic of
their cell of origin. Similarly, well-differentiated squamous cell carci-
nomas produce keratin (seeFig. 6.3), just as well-differentiated he-
patocellular carcinomas secrete bile. In other instances, unanticipated
functions emerge. Some cancers express fetal proteins not produced by
comparable cells in the adult. Cancers of nonendocrine origin may
also produce so-called“ectopic hormones.”For example, certain lung
carcinomas secrete adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), para-
thyroid hormoneelike hormone, insulin, glucagon, and others. More
is said about these so-called“paraneoplastic”phenomena later.
Also relevant in the discussion of differentiation and anaplasia is
dysplasia,referring to disorderly proliferation.Dysplastic epithelium
is recognized by loss of uniformity of individual cells and disturbed
architectural orientation.Dysplastic cells exhibit pleomorphism and
often possess abnormally large, hyperchromatic nuclei. Mitotic/uniFB01gures
are more abundant than usual and frequently appear in the super/uniFB01cial
epithelium, an abnormal location. In addition, there is architectural
disarray. For example, the usual progressive maturation of tall cells in
the basal layer to /uniFB02attened squames on the surface of squamous
epithelium may be lost, such that the epithelium consists of a disor-
dered mixture of dark basal-appearing cells. When dysplastic changes
are severe and involve the entire thickness of the epithelium, the lesion
is referred to as carcinoma in situ,a preinvasive stage of cancer
(Fig. 6.6).
It is important to appreciate that dysplasia is not synonymous with
cancer. Mild to moderate dysplasia sometimes regresses completely,
particularly if inciting causes are removed. However, dysplasia is often
present adjacent to frankly malignant neoplasms (e.g., in lung carci-
nomas arising in the context of cigarette smoking) and as a general
rule marks a tissue as being at increased risk for cancer development.
Local Invasion
The growth of cancers is accompanied by progressive in /uniFB01ltration,
invasion, and destruction of surrounding tissues, whereas most
benign tumors grow as cohesive expansile masses that remain
localized.Because benign tumors grow and expand slowly, they
usually develop a rim of compressed /uniFB01brous tissue, often called the
capsule (Fig. 6.7). The capsule consists of extracellular matrix that is
deposited by stromal cells such as/uniFB01broblasts, which may be activated
by the mechanical stress created by compression of normal tissue by
the expanding tumor. Encapsulation creates a tissue plane that makes
the tumor discrete, moveable (non /uniFB01xed), and readily excisable by
surgical enucleation. However, not all benign neoplasms are encap-
sulated. For example, uterine leiomyoma is discretely demarcated from
the surrounding smooth muscle by a zone of compressed and atten-
uated normal myometrium but lacks a capsule. A few benign tumors
are neither encapsulated nor discretely de/uniFB01ned; lack of demarcation is
particularly likely in benign vascular neoplasms such as hemangiomas,
which may be dif/uniFB01cult to excise. These exceptions are pointed out only
to emphasize that, although encapsulation is the rule in benign tu-
mors, the lack of a capsule does not mean a tumor is malignant.
Next to the development of metastases, invasiveness is the
feature that most reliably distinguishes cancers from benign tumors
(Fig. 6.8).Cancers lack well-de/uniFB01ned capsules. There are instances in
which a slowly growing malignant tumor, such as follicular carcinoma
FIG. 6.3Well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Note
the terminal differentiation of the tumor cells, which are forming keratin
pearls. (From Fletcher CD:Diagnostic Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5,
Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Fig. 23.42.)
FIG. 6.4Pleomorphic malignant tumor (rhabdomyosarcoma). Note the
marked variation in cell and nuclear sizes, the hyperchromatic nuclei, and
the presence of tumor giant cells. (Courtesy of Dr. Trace Worrell,
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
School, Dallas, Texas.)
FIG. 6.5High-power detailed view of anaplastic tumor cells shows
cellular and nuclear variation in size and shape. The prominent cell in the
center/uniFB01eld has an abnormal tripolar spindle.
190 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.4 Pleomorfikmaligntümör (rabdomiyosarkom). Hücre ve çekirdek 
boyutlarındaki belirgin varyasyona, hiperkromatikçekirdeklere ve tümör dev 
hücrelerinin varlığına dikkat edin. (Dr. TraceWorrell'inizniyle,
Patoloji Bölümü, Texas SouthwesternÜniversitesi Tıp Fakültesi,
Dallas, Teksas.)
cells are much less likely to have specialized functional activities.
For example, benign neoplasms and even well-differentiated cancers of
endocrine glands frequently elaborate the hormones characteristic of
their cell of origin. Similarly, well-differentiated squamous cell carci-
nomas produce keratin (seeFig. 6.3), just as well-differentiated he-
patocellular carcinomas secrete bile. In other instances, unanticipated
functions emerge. Some cancers express fetal proteins not produced by
comparable cells in the adult. Cancers of nonendocrine origin may
also produce so-called“ectopic hormones.”For example, certain lung
carcinomas secrete adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), para-
thyroid hormoneelike hormone, insulin, glucagon, and others. More
is said about these so-called“paraneoplastic”phenomena later.
Also relevant in the discussion of differentiation and anaplasia is
dysplasia,referring to disorderly proliferation.Dysplastic epithelium
is recognized by loss of uniformity of individual cells and disturbed
architectural orientation.Dysplastic cells exhibit pleomorphism and
often possess abnormally large, hyperchromatic nuclei. Mitotic/uniFB01gures
are more abundant than usual and frequently appear in the super/uniFB01cial
epithelium, an abnormal location. In addition, there is architectural
disarray. For example, the usual progressive maturation of tall cells in
the basal layer to /uniFB02attened squames on the surface of squamous
epithelium may be lost, such that the epithelium consists of a disor-
dered mixture of dark basal-appearing cells. When dysplastic changes
are severe and involve the entire thickness of the epithelium, the lesion
is referred to as carcinoma in situ,a preinvasive stage of cancer
(Fig. 6.6).
It is important to appreciate that dysplasia is not synonymous with
cancer. Mild to moderate dysplasia sometimes regresses completely,
particularly if inciting causes are removed. However, dysplasia is often
present adjacent to frankly malignant neoplasms (e.g., in lung carci-
nomas arising in the context of cigarette smoking) and as a general
rule marks a tissue as being at increased risk for cancer development.
Local Invasion
The growth of cancers is accompanied by progressive in /uniFB01ltration,
invasion, and destruction of surrounding tissues, whereas most
benign tumors grow as cohesive expansile masses that remain
localized.Because benign tumors grow and expand slowly, they
usually develop a rim of compressed /uniFB01brous tissue, often called the
capsule (Fig. 6.7). The capsule consists of extracellular matrix that is
deposited by stromal cells such as/uniFB01broblasts, which may be activated
by the mechanical stress created by compression of normal tissue by
the expanding tumor. Encapsulation creates a tissue plane that makes
the tumor discrete, moveable (non /uniFB01xed), and readily excisable by
surgical enucleation. However, not all benign neoplasms are encap-
sulated. For example, uterine leiomyoma is discretely demarcated from
the surrounding smooth muscle by a zone of compressed and atten-
uated normal myometrium but lacks a capsule. A few benign tumors
are neither encapsulated nor discretely de/uniFB01ned; lack of demarcation is
particularly likely in benign vascular neoplasms such as hemangiomas,
which may be dif/uniFB01cult to excise. These exceptions are pointed out only
to emphasize that, although encapsulation is the rule in benign tu-
mors, the lack of a capsule does not mean a tumor is malignant.
Next to the development of metastases, invasiveness is the
feature that most reliably distinguishes cancers from benign tumors
(Fig. 6.8).Cancers lack well-de/uniFB01ned capsules. There are instances in
which a slowly growing malignant tumor, such as follicular carcinoma
FIG. 6.3Well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Note
the terminal differentiation of the tumor cells, which are forming keratin
pearls. (From Fletcher CD:Diagnostic Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5,
Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Fig. 23.42.)
FIG. 6.4Pleomorphic malignant tumor (rhabdomyosarcoma). Note the
marked variation in cell and nuclear sizes, the hyperchromatic nuclei, and
the presence of tumor giant cells. (Courtesy of Dr. Trace Worrell,
Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
School, Dallas, Texas.)
FIG. 6.5High-power detailed view of anaplastic tumor cells shows
cellular and nuclear variation in size and shape. The prominent cell in the
center/uniFB01eld has an abnormal tripolar spindle.
190 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.5 Anaplastiktümör hücrelerinin yüksek büyütmeli detaylı görünümü, 
hücre ve çekirdek boyutlarında ve şekillerinde farklılıklar göstermektedir. 
Merkezdeki belirgin hücre, anormal üç kutuplu bir iğ yapısına sahiptir .
20. Anaplazi–FonksiyonelÖzellikler
•Diferansiyeolmamışhücreler:
–Genellikleözgülfonksiyonkaybınasahiptir
•İyidiferansiyemalign tümörler:
–Kökhücredokusunaözgüfonksiyonlarısürdürebilir
–Örnekler:
• Endokrinkarsinomlar→ hormonüretir
• Skuamözhücrelikarsinom→ keratin yapabilir
• Hepatosellülerkarsinom→ safraüretebilir
•Ektopikhormonüretimi:
–Paraneoplastiksendromlarayolaçabilir
21. DisplaziveKarsinomain Situ (Şekil6.6)
•Displazi:
–Epiteldedüzensizproliferasyon
–Hücreselatipivemimaribozukluk
•Özellikler:
–Hücreselpleomorfizm
–Büyük, hiperkromatikçekirdekler
–Yüzeyelkatlardamitotikşekiller
–Normal olgunlaşmavepolaritekaybı
•Karsinomain situ:
–Displaziepitel kalınlığınıntamamınıtutar
–Bazalmembranıgeçmez
–İnvazivkansereilerlemeriskiyüksektir
of thyroid, appears to be encased by a capsule, but careful microscopic
examination reveals tiny tongues of tumor penetrating the margin and
in/uniFB01ltrating adjacent structures. This in/uniFB01ltrative mode of growth makes
it necessary to remove a wide margin of surrounding normal tissue
when complete excision of a malignant tumor is attempted. Patholo-
gists carefully examine the margins of resected tumors to ensure they
are devoid of cancer cells(clean surgical margins).
Metastasis
Metastasis is de/uniFB01ned by the spread of a tumor to sites that are
physically discontinuous with the primary tumor and is one of the
hallmarks of malignant tumors.The invasiveness of cancers permits
them to penetrate blood vessels, lymphatics, and body cavities,
providing opportunities for spread (Fig. 6.9). Overall, approximately
30% of patients with newly diagnosed solid tumors (excluding skin
cancers other than melanomas) present with clinically evident me-
tastases, and an additional 20% have occult metastases at the time of
diagnosis.
In general, large anaplastic neoplasms are more likely to have
metastasized at diagnosis, but there are exceptions. Extremely small
cancers may metastasize; conversely, some large and ominous-looking
lesions may not. While all malignant tumors can metastasize, some do
so very infrequently. For example, basal cell carcinomas of the skin
and most primary tumors of the central nervous system are locally
invasive but rarely metastasize. It is evident then that the properties of
local invasion and metastasis are separable.
A special circumstance involves so-called “blood cancers,”the
leukemias and lymphomas. These tumors are derived from blood-
forming cells that normally have the capacity to enter the blood-
stream and travel to distant sites; as a result, with only rare exceptions,
leukemias and lymphomas are assumed to be disseminated at diag-
nosis and are always considered to be malignant.
Malignant neoplasms disseminate by one of three pathways:
(1) seeding within body cavities; (2) lymphatic spread; or (3) he-
matogenous spread.Spread by seeding occurs when neoplasms
invade a body cavity. This mode of dissemination is particularly
A B
FIG. 6.6Carcinoma in situ. (A) Low-power view shows that the entire thickness of the epithelium is replaced
by atypical dysplastic cells. There is no orderly differentiation of squamous cells. The basement membrane is
intact, and there is no tumor in the subepithelial stroma. (B) High-power view of another region shows failure of
normal differentiation, marked nuclear and cellular pleomorphism, and numerous mitotic /uniFB01gures extending
toward the surface. The intact basement membrane(below)is not seen in this section.
A B
FIG. 6.7Fibroadenoma of the breast. (A) The tan, encapsulated tumor is sharply demarcated from sur-
rounding white breast tissue. (B) A microscopic view shows cords of entrapped dark staining epithelium
compressed by a loose/uniFB01brous stroma surrounded by bands of collagen. (B, From Fletcher CD: Diagnostic
Histopathology of Tumors,ed 5, Philadelphia, 2021, Elsevier, Fig. 16.15A.)
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 191
ŞEKİL 6.6. Karsinomain situ.(A) Düşük büyütmeli görünüm, epitelintüm kalınlığının 
atipikdisplastikhücrelerle değiştirildiğini göstermektedir . Yassı hücrelerde düzenli bir 
farklılaşma yoktur . Bazal membransağlamdır ve subepiteliyalstromadatümör yoktur . 
(B) Başka bir bölgenin yüksek büyütmeli görünümü, normal farklılaşmanın 
başarısızlığını, belirgin nükleer ve hücresel pleomorfizmive yüzeye doğru uzanan çok 
sayıda mitotikfigürü göstermektedir . Sağlam bazal membran(aşağıda) bu kesitte 
görülmemektedir .
22. Displazi–KlinikÖnemi
•Displazi:
–Kanserleeşanlamlıdeğildir
•Hafif–ortadisplazi:
–Nedeneyöneliktedaviilegerileyebilir
•Ancak:
–Çoğuzaman malign neoplazmyanıbaşındagörülür
–O dokudakansergelişmeriskininarttığınıgösterir
•Örnekler:
–Sigaraiçenlerinbronşmukozasındadisplazi
–Servikalintraepitelyalneoplazi
23. LokalBüyüme–Benign Tümörler
•Benign tümörler:
–Genelliklelokalize, genişleyenkitlelerdir
–Çevredokularıiterancakistilaetmez
•Kapsül:
–Sıkıştırılmışfibrözdokudanoluşur
–Tümörileçevredokuarasındadüzlemselsınır
–Cerrahienükleasyonukolaylaştırır
•İstisnalar:
–Bazıbenign vaskülertümörler(hemanjiyom) sınırlıolmayabilir
24. Lokalİnvazyon–Malign Tümörler
•Malign tümörler:
–İnvazivbüyümegösterir
–Çevrenormal dokularasızarvetahripeder
•Kapsül:
–Genellikleyoktur
–Olsabile mikroskobik“tümördilcikleri” kapsülüdelipgeçer
•Cerrahi:
–Yeterligenişliktesağlamsınır(cerrahimargin) gerekir
–Patolojikincelemeile“temizsınır” teyidiönemlidir
25. Metastaz–TanımveÖnemi
•Metastaz:
–Primer tümördenfizikselolarakayrıbölgelerde
–Neoplastik implantlarınoluşması
•Maligniteiçin:
–Ayırtediciözelliktir
•Klinik:
–Kanserilişkilimortaliteninbaşlıcanedenidir
•İstisnalar:
–Bazalhücrelikarsinomlar
–Birçokprimer santralsinirsistemitümörü
–Lokalinvazivdir, nadirenmetastazyapar
26. MetastazınSıklığıveÖrnekler
•Teşhisanında:
–Katıtümörlühastaların≈%30’unda klinikmetastaz
–≈%20’sinde gizli(okült) metastaz
•Tümörboyutuvediferansiyasyon:
–Büyükveanaplastiktümörlerdemetastazolasılığıartar
–Ancakküçüktümörlerde metastazyapabilir
•Lösemivelenfomalar:
–Kan velenfoiddokuüzerindenyaygınolduklarıvarsayılır
–Tanıanında“sistemik” kabuledilir
27. MetastazYolları–Genel
•Üçana metastazyolu:
–Vücutboşluklarıiçinetohumlanma
–Lenfatikyayılım
–Hematogen(kanyoluyla) yayılım
•Birçoktümör:
–Birdenfazlayoluaynıandakullanabilir
– Şekil6.9, Şekil6.10
characteristic of cancers of the ovary, which often cover the peri-
toneal surfaces widely yet may not invade the underlying tissues. In
this instance, the ability to implant and grow at distant sites seems to
be separable from the capacity to invade. Neoplasms of the central
nervous system, such as a medulloblastoma or ependymoma, may
penetrate the cerebral ventricles and be carried by the cerebrospinal
/uniFB02uid until they implant on the meningeal surfaces surrounding the
brain or spinal cord.
Lymphatic spread is more typical of carcinomas, whereas he-
matogenous spread is favored by sarcomas. There are numerous
interconnections, however, between the lymphatic and vascular sys-
tems, so all forms of cancer may disseminate through either or both
systems. The pattern of lymph node involvement depends on the site
of the primary neoplasm and the pathways of local lymphatic
drainage. Lung carcinomas arising in the respiratory passages metas-
tasize/uniFB01rst to the regional bronchial lymph nodes and then to the
tracheobronchial and hilar nodes. Carcinoma of the breast usually
arises in the upper outer quadrant and spreads /uniFB01rst to the axillary
nodes; however, medial breast lesions may drain to the nodes along the
internal mammary artery. Thereafter, in both instances, the
supraclavicular and infraclavicular nodes may be seeded. In some
cases, cancer cells travel in lymphatic channels through the immedi-
ately proximal nodes only to be trapped in subsequent lymph nodes,
producing so-called“skip metastases.”The cells may also traverse all
the lymph nodes and reach the vascular compartment by way of the
thoracic duct.
A“sentinel lymph node”is the/uniFB01rst regional lymph node that
receives lymph/uniFB02ow from a primary tumor.It can be identi/uniFB01ed by
injection of dyes or radiolabeled tracers near the primary tumor. Bi-
opsy of sentinel lymph nodes allows determination of the extent of
tumor spread and can be used to plan treatment. Of note, although
enlargement of nodes near a primary neoplasm should raise concern
of metastatic spread, it does not always indicate cancerous involve-
ment. The necrotic cells of the neoplasm and tumor antigens often
evoke immunologic responses in draining nodes that lead to reactive
hyperplasia(lymphadenitis).Thus, biopsy is necessary to determine if
an enlarged lymph node is involved by tumor.
Hematogenous spread of cancers is most likely to occur through
the penetration of thin-walled veins instead of thick-walled arteries.
With venous invasion, the bloodborne cells often arrest in the /uniFB01rst
capillary bed they encounter. Since the portal system/uniFB02ows to the liver
and caval blood/uniFB02ows to the lungs, the liver and lungs are the most
frequent sites of hematogenous dissemination. Cancers arising in or-
gans near the vertebral column such as the thyroid and prostate often
embolize through the paravertebral plexus, possibly explaining the
proclivity of these cancers to spread to the spine. Other carcinomas,
particularly renal cell carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma, have a
propensity to grow within veins in a snakelike fashion, sometimes
extending up the inferior vena cava to the right side of the heart.
Remarkably, such intravenous growth may not be accompanied by
widespread dissemination.
In addition to the stepwise spread of cancers to the next draining
lymph node or capillary bed, other cancers frequently spread to
noncontiguous organs. For example, prostatic carcinoma preferentially
spreads to bone, bronchogenic carcinoma tends to involve the adrenal
glands and the brain, neuroblastoma spreads to the liver and bones,
and uveal melanoma spreads to the liver. Conversely, other tissues
such as skeletal muscle, although rich in capillaries, are rarely sites of
A B
FIG. 6.8Invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast. (A) Cut section shows that the stony-hard lesion is retracted
and in/uniFB01ltrates the surrounding breast substance. (B) A microscopic view shows invasion of breast stroma and
fat by nests and cords of tumor cells. Note the absence of a well-de /uniFB01ned capsule. (Courtesy of Dr. Susan
Lester, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.)
FIG. 6.9A liver studded with metastatic cancer.
192 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.9 Metastatikkanserle kaplı bir karaciğer.
tumor metastases. The molecular basis of such tissue-speci/uniFB01c homing
of tumor cells is discussed later.
Thus, numerous features of tumors (summarized in Fig. 6.10)
usually permit the differentiation of benign and malignant neoplasms.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Major insights into the causes of cancer have been obtained by
identifying associations between particular environmental, heredi-
tary, or cultural in /uniFB02uences and speci/uniFB01c neoplasms.The well-
established causal association of cigarette smoking with lung cancer
arose primarily from epidemiologic studies. A comparison of the
incidence rates for colon cancer and dietary patterns in the Western
world and in Africa led to the recognition that dietary fat and /uniFB01ber
content may contribute signi/uniFB01cantly to the causation of this cancer.
Certain diseases associated with an increased risk for cancer also
provide clues to cancer pathogenesis. Next, we /uniFB01rst summarize the
overall magnitude of cancer incidence and then review factors relating
to the patient and the environment that in/uniFB02uence the predisposition to
cancer.
Cancer Incidence
For the year 2018, it is estimated that there were over 17 million cases
of cancer and 9.6 million deaths due to cancer worldwide (approxi-
mately 26,300 deaths per day). Moreover, due to increasing population
size, it is projected that the numbers of cancer cases and deaths
worldwide will increase to 24 million and 14.6 million, respectively, by
the year 2035. Additional perspective on the prevalence of speci /uniFB01c
cancers can be gained from national incidence and mortality data. In
the United States, it is estimated that the year 2022 will be marked by
1.9 million new cases of cancer and 609,000 cancer deaths. Recent
incidence data for the most common forms of cancers in the United
States, with the major killers identi/uniFB01ed, are presented inFig. 6.11.
The death rates for certain cancers in the United States have
changed over several decades. Since 1995, the cancer death rate has
decreased by roughly 20% in men and 10% in women. Among men,
80% of the decrease is attributed to lower death rates for cancers of the
lung, prostate, and colon; among women, nearly 60% of the decrease is
due to reductions in death rates from breast and colorectal cancers.
Decreased use of tobacco products is responsible for the reduction in
lung cancer deaths, while improved detection and treatment are
responsible for the decrease in death rates for colorectal, female breast,
and prostate cancers.
The last half-century has also seen a sharp decline in death rates
from cervical cancer and gastric cancer in the United States. The
decrease in cervical cancer is directly attributable to widespread use of
the Papanicolaou (Pap) test for early detection of this tumor and its
precursor lesions. The widespread deployment of the human papil-
lomavirus (HPV) vaccine may nearly eliminate this cancer in coming
years. The cause of the decline in death rates for cancer of the stomach
is obscure; it may be related to decreasing exposure to unknown di-
etary carcinogens.
Environmental Factors
Environmental exposures are dominant risk factors for many
common cancers, suggesting that many cancers are preventable.
This notion is supported by the geographic variation in death rates
from speci/uniFB01c cancers, which is thought to stem mainly from differ-
ences in environmental exposures. For instance, death rates from
breast cancer are about four to/uniFB01ve times higher in the United States
and Europe than in Japan. Conversely, the death rate for gastric car-
cinoma in men and women is about seven times higher in Japan than
Fallopian tube
Ovary
Tumor
Vein
Endometrium
BENIGN
(Leiomyoma)
Small
Well demarcated
Slow growing
Noninvasive
Nonmetastatic
Well differentiated
MALIGNANT
(Leiomyosarcoma)
Large
Poorly demarcated
Rapidly growing with
  hemorrhage and necrosis
Locally invasive
Metastatic
Poorly differentiated
FIG. 6.10Comparison between a benign tumor of the myometrium (leiomyoma) and a malignant tumor of
similar origin (leiomyosarcoma).
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 193
ŞEKİL 6.10 Miyometriyumuniyi huylu bir tümörü (leiomyoma) ile benzer kökenli 
kötü huylu bir tümörün (leiomyosarkoma) karşılaştırılması.
28. VücutBoşluklarınaTohumlanma
•Tümör, serözboşluğaaçılır:
–Periton, plevra, perikard, beyinventrikülleri
•Örnek:
–Over karsinomu:
•Peritonyüzeylerineyayılır
•“Karıniçitohumlanma”şeklinde
•Santralsinirsistemi:
–Medulloblastom, ependimom
–Beyinomuriliksıvısıyoluilemeninksvespinal yüzeylereyayılım
29. LenfatikYayılım
•Ençok:
–Karsinomlariçintipiktir
•Bölgesellenfdüğümleri:
–İlk metastazbölgesidir
•Örnekler:
–Akciğerkarsinomu:
• Bronşiyal→ trakeobronşiyal→ hilerlenfdüğümleri
–Meme karsinomu:
• Aksillerveyainternal meme lenfdüğümleri
•Bekçilenfdüğümü:
–Primer tümördenilk lenfdrenajınıalandüğüm
30. BekçiLenfDüğümüveKlinikKullanım
•Bekçilenfdüğümü:
–Tümörçevresineboyaveyaradyoaktifizleyicienjeksiyonuilesaptanır
•Cerrahibiyopsi:
–Metastazvarlığınıgösterirveyadışlar
•Önem:
–Evrelemevetedaviplanlamasında
–Gereksizgenişlenfadenektomidenkaçınmada
•Unutulmamalı:
–Lenfdüğümübüyümesireaktifhiperplazide olabilir
–Metastaztanısıiçinhistolojikdoğrulamaşarttır
31. Hematogen(Kan Yoluyla) Yayılım
•Ensık:
–İnce duvarlıvenleryoluyla
–Arterlerdahanadirentutulur
•İlk durak:
–Damar drenajınagöreilk kapilleryatak
–Portal sistem→ karaciğer
–Sistemikvenözdrenaj→ akciğer
•Örnekler:
–Hepatosellülerkarsinom, renal hücrelikarsinom:
• İnferior vena kavayadoğruintravaskülerbüyüme
–Omurgayakınındakitümörler:
• Paravertebral venpleksusu→ vertebral metastaz
32. TümörTropizmiveSeçiciYerleşim
•Bazıtümörler:
–Belirliorganlarametastazyapmaeğilimindedir
•Örnekler:
–Prostatkarsinomu→ kemikmetastazı
–Bronkojenikkarsinom→ adrenal bez, beyin
–Nöroblastom→ karaciğer, kemik
–Üvealmelanom→ karaciğer
•Tersine:
–İskeletkasıgibiçokvaskülerdokular:
• Nadir metastazbölgesidir
•Mekanizma:
–Adhezyonmolekülleri, kemokinreseptörleri, stromal faktörler(dahasonra)
33. KanserEpidemiyolojisi–Global Veriler
•2018 tahmini:
–17 milyonyeni kanservakası
–≈9,6 milyonkanserölümü
•Eğilim:
–Nüfusartışıveyaşlanmailebirlikte
–2035’te:
• ≈24 milyonyeni vaka
• ≈14,6 milyonölüm(tahmini)
•Kanser:
–Kardiyovaskülerhastalıklardansonraikinciölümnedeni
34. KanserEpidemiyolojisi–ABD Örneği(Şekil6.11)
•2022 tahmini(ABD):
–≈1,9 milyonyeni vaka
–≈609.000 ölüm
•Sıkgörülenkanserler:
–Erkek: prostat, akciğer, kolorektal
–Kadın: meme, akciğer, kolorektal
•Son 20–30 yıl:
–Kansermortalitesindeazalma:
• Erkeklerde≈%20
• Kadınlarda≈%10
–Sigarakullanımındakiazalmavetanı/tedaviiyileşmesiileilişkili
in the United States. Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most lethal
cancer in many parts of Africa. Most evidence suggests that these
geographic differences have environmental origins. For example, Nisei
(second-generation Japanese living in the United States) have mor-
tality rates for certain forms of cancer that are intermediate between
those in natives of Japan and in Americans who have lived in the
United States for many generations. The two rates come closer with
each passing generation.
There is no paucity of environmental factors that contribute to
cancer. They are present in the ambient environment, in the workplace,
in food, and in personal practices. Some are universal (e.g., sunlight)
whereas others are largely restricted to urban settings (e.g., asbestos) or
particular occupations (Table 6.2). The most important environmental
exposures linked to cancer include the following:
•Diet.Certain features of diet have been implicated as predisposing
in/uniFB02uences. More broadly, obesity, currently epidemic in the United
States and other parts of the world, is associated with a modestly
increased risk for developing many cancers.
•Smoking,particularly of cigarettes, is linked to cancer of the mouth,
pharynx, larynx, esophagus, pancreas, bladder, and, most signi /uniFB01-
cantly, the lung, as 90% of lung cancer deaths are related to smoking.
•Alcohol consumption.Excess alcohol intake is an independent risk
factor for cancers of the oropharynx, larynx, esophagus, breast, and
(due to alcoholic cirrhosis) liver. Moreover, alcohol and tobacco
smoking act synergistically to increase the risk for developing can-
cers of the upper airways and upper digestive tract.
•Reproductive history.There is strong evidence that lifelong cumula-
tive exposure to estrogen stimulation, particularly if unopposed by
progesterone, increases the risk for developing cancers of the endo-
metrium and breast, both of which are estrogen-responsive tissues.
•Infectious agentsare estimated to cause approximately 15% of can-
cers worldwide (discussed later).
Age and Cancer
In general, the frequency of cancer increases with age. Most cancer
deaths occur between 55 and 75 years of age; the rate declines, along
with the population base, after 75 years of age. The rising incidence
with age is explained by the accumulation of somatic mutations in cells
that drive the emergence of malignant neoplasms (discussed later),
and by the decline in immune surveillance that accompanies aging.
Although cancer preferentially affects older adults, it is also
responsible for slightly more than 10% of all deaths among children
younger than 15 years of age (Chapter 5). The major lethal cancers in
children are tumors of the central nervous system, leukemias, lym-
phomas, and soft tissue and bone sarcomas. As discussed later, study of
childhood tumors such as retinoblastoma has provided fundamental
insights into the pathogenesis of malignant transformation.
Acquired Predisposing Conditions
Acquired conditions that predispose to cancer include chronic in-
/uniFB02ammatory disorders, immunode/uniFB01ciency states, and precursor le-
sions.Many chronic in/uniFB02ammatory conditions create a fertile“soil”for
the development of malignant tumors (Table 6.3). Tumors arising in
the context of chronic in/uniFB02ammation are mostly carcinomas but also
include mesothelioma and several kinds of lymphoma. By contrast,
immunode/uniFB01ciency states mainly predispose to virus-induced cancers,
including speci/uniFB01c types of lymphoma and carcinoma and some
sarcoma-like proliferations.
Precursor lesionsare characterized by disturbances of epithelial
differentiation that are associated with an elevated risk of carcinoma.
They may arise secondary to chronic in/uniFB02ammation or hormonal im-
balances (in endocrine-sensitive tissues) or occur spontaneously.
Molecular analyses have shown that precursor lesions often possess
some of the same genetic lesions that are found in their associated
cancers (discussed later). However, progression to cancer is not
A  ESTIMATED NEW CANCER CASES* IN THE US IN 2022
Prostate
Males 983,160 Females 934,870 Males 322,090Female 287,270
Lung and
bronchus
Colon and
rectum
Urinary bladder
Melanoma
of the skin
Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
Kidney and
renal pelvis
Oral cavity
and pharynx
Leukemia
Pancreas
All other sites
27%
12%
8%
6%
6%
4%
5%
4%
4%
3%
21%
Breast
Lung and
bronchus
Colon and
rectum
Uterine corpus
Thyroid
Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
Melanoma
of the skin
Kidney and
renal pelvis
Leukemia
Pancreas
All other sites
31%
13%
8%
7%
3%
4%
5%
3%
3%
3%
20%
B  ESTIMATED CANCER DEATHS IN THE US IN 2022
Lung and
bronchus
Prostate
Colon and
rectum
Pancreas
Leukemia
Esophagus
Liver and
intrahepatic
bile duct
Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
Urinary bladder
All other sites
21%
11%
9%
8%
6%
4%
4%
4%
4%
26%
Lung and
bronchus
Breast
Colon and
rectum
Pancreas
Ovary
Leukemia
Uterine corpus
Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
Brain and
other nervous
system
Liver and
intrahepatic
bile duct
All other sites
21%
15%
8%
8%
4%
3%
3%
4%
4%
3%
27%
Brain and
other nervous
system
3%
FIG. 6.11Estimated cancer incidence (A) and mortality (B) by site and sex in the United States. Excludes
basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ carcinomas, except urinary bladder. The most common
tumors are denoted by red text. (Data and derived numbers are from the National Cancer Institute - Surveil-
lance Epidemiology and End Result [SEER] program.)
194 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.11 Amerika Birleşik Devletleri'nde bölgeye ve cinsiyete göre tahmini 
kanser insidansı(A) ve mortalitesi(B). Bazal hücreli ve skuamözhücreli deri 
kanserleri ve idrar kesesi dışındaki in situkarsinomlarhariçtir . En yaygın tümörler 
kırmızı metinle gösterilmiştir . (Veriler ve türetilmiş sayılar Ulusal Kanser Enstitüsü -Gözetim Epidemiyolojisi ve Sonuçları [SEER] programından alınmıştır.)
35. ÇevreselFaktörlerveKanserRiski
•Çevreselmaruziyetler:
–Birçokyaygınkanseriçinbaskınrisk faktörüdür
•Coğrafifarklılıklar:
–Meme kanseri:
• ABD/Avrupa’daJaponya’yagöre4–5 kat fazla
–Midekanseri:
• Japonya’daABD’yegöre≈7 kat fazla
–Hepatosellülerkarsinom:
• BazıAfrika bölgelerindeenyaygınkanser
•Göçvenesiller:
–Riskleryeni ülkepopulasyonunadoğrudeğişir
–Çevreseletkenlerinrolünüdestekler
36. ÖnemliÇevreselRisk Faktörleri(Tablo6.2)
•Beslenmeveobezite:
–Birçoksolid tümörriskiniartırır
•Sigara:
–Ağız, farenks, larenks, özofagus, pankreas, mesane
–Akciğerkanseriölümlerinin≈%90’ı sigaraileilişkili
•Alkol:
–Orofarenks, larenks, özofagus, meme, karaciğer(sirozilişkili)
–Sigarailebirliktesinerjiketki
•Üremeöyküsü:
–Östrojenmaruziyetininartması:
• Endometrium, meme kanseririski↑
•Enfeksiyonlar:
–Dünyakanserlerinin≈%15’i enfeksiyonilişkili
Tablo6.2. MeslekiKanserler(Bölüm1/2)
Etkenler veya etken 
grupları
Hakkında makul kanıt bulunan 
insan kanserleri
Tipik kullanım / görüldüğü yerler
Arsenikvearsenik
bileşikleri
Akciğer karsinomu, deri karsinomu Metal ergitmeninyanürünü; alaşımların, elektrikveyarıiletken
aygıtların, ilaçların, herbisitlerin, fungisitlerinvehayvanbanyo
solüsyonlarınınbileşeni
Asbest Akciğer karsinomu, mezotelyoma Yangına, ısıyavesürtünmeyedayanıklıolduğuiçineskidenpekçok
amaçlakullanılırdı; hâlenmevcutyapılardaveyangınadayanıklı
tekstillerde, sürtünmemalzemelerinde(ör. frenbalataları), altlıkve
çatıkaplamakâğıtlarındaveyerkarolarındabulunur
Benzen Akut miyeloid lösemi Hafifyağınbaşlıcabileşeni; bilinenriskinerağmenbaskıve
litografi, boya, kauçuk, kuru temizleme, yapıştırıcılarvekaplamalar
iledeterjanlardaçoksayıdakullanımalanıvardır; eskidençözücü
vefumigant olarakyaygınbiçimdekullanılırdı
Kadmiyum ve 
kadmiyum bileşikleri
Prostat karsinomu Kullanımalanlarıarasındasarıpigmentlervefosforlarbulunur; 
lehimlerdebulunur; pillerde,alaşımbileşeniolarakvemetal 
kaplamavekaplamalardakullanılır
Krombileşikleri Akciğerkarsinomu Metal alaşımlarının, boyaların, pigmentlerinvekoruyucuların
bileşenidir
Tablo 6.2. Mesleki Kanserler (Bölüm 2/2)
Etkenler veya etken grupları Hakkında makul kanıt bulunan 
insan kanserleri
Tipik kullanım / görüldüğü yerler
Nikel bileşikleri Akciğer ve orofaringeal karsinom Nikelkaplama; demiriçeren
alaşımların, seramiklerinvepillerin
bileşeni; paslanmazçelikark 
kaynağınınyanürünüdür
Radon vebozunmaürünleri Akciğer karsinomu Uranyumiçerenminerallerin
bozunmasındankaynaklanır; taş
ocaklarıveyeraltımadenlerinde
potansiyelolarakciddibirtehlikedir
Vinilklorür Hepatikanjiosarkom Soğutucu; vinilpolimerleriçin
monomer; plastikleriçinyapıştırıcı; 
eskidenbasınçlıkaplardainert 
aerosol iticigazıolarakkullanılmıştır
37. YaşveKanser
•Kanserinsidansı:
–Yaşlabirlikteartar
•Ölüm:
–Kanserölümlerininçoğu55–75 yaşarasında
•Sebepler:
–Somatikmutasyonbirikimi
–Yaşlanmayabağlıbağışıklıkgözetimininazalması
•Çocuklukçağıkanserleri:
–Tümçocukölümlerinin≈%10’u
–Sıktipler:
• Akutlösemiler, lenfomalar
• Santralsinirsistemitümörleri
• Yumuşakdokuvekemiksarkomları
38. EdinilmişYatkınlıkKoşulları(Tablo6.3)
•Kronikenflamasyon:
–Çoğunluklakarsinomgelişimiiçinzeminhazırlar
–Örnekler:
• Kronikgastrit→ mideadenokarsinomu
• Kronikhepatit→ hepatosellülerkarsinom
• İnflamatuvarbağırsakhastalığı→ kolorektalkarsinom
•İmmünyetmezlik:
–Özelliklevirüskaynaklıtümörlereyatkınlık
• Örn. Epstein–Barr Virüs(EBV) ilişkililenfomalar
•Öncülezyonlar(prekürsör):
–Displazivebazıbenign lezyonlar
–Kansereilerlemeriski↑
Tablo 6.3. Kronik İnflamatuvar Durumlar ve Kanser 
(Bölüm 1/2)
Patolojik durum İlişkili neoplazm(lar) Etiyolojik etken
Asbestoz, silikoz Mezotelyoma, akciğerkarsinomu Asbest lifleri, silika partikülleri
İnflamatuvar barsak hastalığı Kolorektalkarsinom –
Liken sklerozus Vulvar skuamözhücrelikarsinom –
Pankreatit Pankreaskarsinomu Kronik alkol kullanımı, germ hattı 
mutasyonları (örn. tripsinojen 
geninde)
Kronik kolesistit Safrakesesikanseri Safra asitleri, bakteriler, safra kesesi 
taşları
Reflü özofajiti, Barrett özofagusu Özofagusadenokarsinomu Mide asidi
Sjögrensendromu, Hashimoto 
tiroiditi
Ekstranodalmarjinalzonlenfoma –
Tablo 6.3. Kronik İnflamatuvar Durumlar ve Kanser 
(Bölüm 2/2)
Patolojik durum İlişkili neoplazm(lar) Etiyolojik etken
Opisthorchis, kolanjit Kolanjiyokarsinom, kolon karsinomuKaraciğertrematodları(Opisthorchis 
viverrini)
Gastrit / ülserler Gastrik adenokarsinom, ekstranodal 
marjinal zon lenfoma
Helicobacter pylori
Hepatit Hepatoselüler karsinom HepatitB ve/veyaC virüsü
Osteomiyelit Drenajyapansinüslerdekarsinom Bakteriyel enfeksiyon
Kroniksistit Mesanekarsinomu Şistozomiyazis
Opisthorchis,safra kanalına yerleşen yassı ve yaprak şeklinde birkaraciğer kelebeği
39. ÖnemliÖncüLezyonÖrnekleri
•Bronşmukozasındaskuamözmetaplazivedisplazi:
–Alışkanlıkhalinegelmişsigaraiçenlerde
–Akciğerkarsinomuiçinrisk ↑
•Endometrial hiperplazivedisplazi:
–Karşılanmamışöstrojenuyarımı
–Endometrium karsinomuiçinrisk↑
•Lökoplaki:
–Ağız, vulva, penis mukozasında
–Skuamözhücrelikarsinomiçinrisk ↑
•Villözadenom(kolonpolipi):
–Kolorektalkarsinomadönüşmeriski↑
40. İyiHuyluTümörlerKansereÖncelikmi?
•Genelolarak:
–Tümbenign tümörlerpremaligndeğildir
•Ancak:
–Bazıbenign tümörleriçinmalign dönüşümriskianlamlıdır
•Örnekler:
–Kolonadenomu:
• Vakaların≈%50’sinde karsinomadönüşümriski
–Uterus leiomyomu:
• Malign dönüşümson derecenadirdir
•Klinik:
–Her benign tümörtipi içinrisk ayrıdeğerlendirilmelidir
41. KanserGenleri–KavramsalÇerçeve
•Kansergenleri:
–Kanserlerdetekrartekrarmutasyonauğrayangenler
–Hücreyebüyüme/survivavantajısağlar
•Dörtana grup:
–Onkogenler
–Tümörbaskılayıcıgenler
–Apoptozudüzenleyengenler
–Tümör–konak etkileşiminivebağışıklıkyanıtınıdüzenleyengenler
•Mutasyonlar:
–Çoğusomatik, bazılarıgerm hattı(aileselsendromlar)
42. KanserGen Kategorileri
•Onkogenler:
–Proto-onkogenlerinişlevkazanımımutasyonları
–Büyümeyiteşvikedenonkoproteinlerkodlar
–Genelliklebaskınetkilidir(tekalelyeterli)
•Tümörbaskılayıcıgenler:
–Büyümeyifrenler, genomukorur
–İşlevkaybıilekansergelişimineizinverir
–Çoğudurumdaher ikialelininaktivasyonugerekir
•Apoptozgenleri:
–Hücresağkalımınıveyaölümünüdüzenler
•Bağışıklıkvemikroçevregenleri:
–Bağışıklıkgözetimi, immünkaçış
–Stromal hücrelerleetkileşim
43. SürücüveYolcuMutasyonlar
•Sürücümutasyonlar:
–Kansergenlerininfonksiyonunudeğiştirir
–Karsinogenezvetümörilerlemesinedoğrudankatkısağlar
–Genelliklekansergenleriiçindekümelenir
•Yolcumutasyonlar:
–Uygunlukaçısındannötr
–Hücreseldavranışıdeğiştirmez
–Genomboyuncadağınık
•Ancak:
–Yolcu Mutasyonlar Dahasonratedavibaskısıaltında
–Dirençsağlayarak“yeni sürücü” halinegelebilir
•Klinik:
–Mutasyonel“imza” analizi(ör. UV, sigara, aflatoksin)
44. Genomikİstikrarsızlık–DNA OnarımıveKanser
•DNA onarımsistemleri:
–Mutasyonyükünüsınırlamadakritiktir
•Onarımkusurları:
–Mutasyonoranınıartırır
–Sürücümutasyonediniminikolaylaştırır
•ÖnemliDNA onarımbozuklukları:
–Uyumsuzlukonarımı(MMR)
–Nükleotideksizyononarımı(NER)
–Homolog rekombinasyononarımı
–DNA polimeraz“proofreading” defektleri
•Sonuç:
–Genomikinstabilite→ karsinogeneziçinzemin
45. Genomikİstikrarsızlık–ÖrnekSendromlar
•Kalıtsalpolipozsuzkolorektalkansersendromu:
–Lynch sendromu, MMR gen mutasyonları
•Kserodermapigmentozum:
–Nükleotideksizyononarımıkusuru
–Ultraviyole(UV) ilişkiliderikanserlerindedramatikartış
•Homolog rekombinasyonbozuklukları:
–Bloom sendromu, ataksi–telanjiektazi, Fanconi anemisi
–Artmışlösemi, lenfoma, solid tümörriski
•BRCA1/BRCA2 mutasyonları:
–Meme, ovaryumvediğerkanserlerderisk ↑
Tablo6.4. KansereKalıtsalYatkınlık
Kalıtsal yatkınlık / sendrom Gen(ler)
Otozomaldominant kansersendromları
Retinoblastom RB
Li-Fraumeni sendromu(çeşitlitümörler) TP53
Melanom CDKN2A
Aileseladenomatözpolipozis/ kolonkanseri APC
Nörofibromatozistip 1 ve2 NF1, NF2
Meme ve over tümörleri BRCA1, BRCA2
Multiplendokrinneoplazitip 1 ve2 MEN1, RET
Kalıtsalnonpolipoziskolonkanseri(HNPCC, Lynch sendromu) MSH2, MLH1, MSH6
Nevoid bazalhücrelikarsinomsendromu PTCH1
DNA tamirbozukluğunabağlıotozomalresesifsendromlar
Xeroderma pigmentosum Nükleotideksizyontamirindegörevliçeşitligenler
Ataksi-telenjiektazi ATM
Bloom sendromu BLM
Fanconi anemisi DNA çaprazbağlarınıntamirindegörevliçeşitligenler
46. KronikEnflamasyonveTümörGelişimi
•İnvazivkanserler:
–Çoğuzaman kronikenflamatuarinfiltrasyongösterir
•Enflamatuarhücrelerinpotansiyeletkileri:
–Büyümeyidestekleyenfaktörlersalgılar:
• Epidermal BüyümeFaktörü(EGF) vb.
–Hücredışımatriksi(ECM) parçalayanproteazlarüretir
–Anjiyogeneziartırır(VaskülerEndotelyalBüyümeFaktörü(VEGF))
–İstilavemetastazıkolaylaştırır
–Bağışıklıkbaskılayıcımikroçevreoluşturur:
• T düzenleyicihücreler(Treg),miyeloidkökenlibaskılayıcıhücreler(MDSC’ler)
47. ÇokAşamalıKarsinogenez(Şekil6.14)
•Karsinogenez:
–Çokaşamalıbirsüreçtir
•Öz:
–Birdençokgenetikveepigenetik olay
–Zaman içindebirikir
•Sonuç:
–Kanserintemelayırtediciözelliklerininkazanımı
–Tümörilerlemesi:
• Dahaagresif, tedaviyedirençlialt klonlarınseçilimi
•Klinik:
–İleritümörlergenetikolarakheterojendir
–Tek basamaklıtedaviyedirençgelişimisıkgörülür
genes. They inhibit gene expression posttranscriptionally by repressing
translation or, in some cases, by promoting the cleavage of messenger
RNA (mRNA). In view of their important functions in control of cell
growth, differentiation, and survival, it is not surprising that miRNAs
can also contribute to carcinogenesis. Speci/uniFB01cally, if the target of a
miRNA is a tumor suppressor gene, then overactivity of the miRNA
can reduce the activity of the encoded tumor suppressor protein. Such
miRNAs are sometimes referred to as oncomirs.Conversely, if a
miRNA normally inhibits the translation of an oncogene, a reduction
in the quantity or function of that miRNA will lead to overproduction
of the oncogene product. Such relationships have been established by
miRNA pro/uniFB01ling of several human tumors. For example, down-
regulation or deletion of certain miRNAs in some leukemias and
lymphomas results in increased expression ofBCL2,an antiapoptotic
gene. Dysregulation of other miRNAs that control the expression of
theRASandMYConcogenes has also been detected in lung tumors
and in certain B-cell leukemias, respectively.
Epigenetic Modifications and Cancer
You will recall fromChapter 4that epigenetics refers to reversible,
heritable changes in gene expression that occur without mutation.
Such changes involve posttranslational modi/uniFB01cations of histones and
DNA methylation, both of which affect gene expression. In normal,
differentiated cells, a large portion of the genome is not expressed.
These regions of the genome are silenced by DNA methylation and
histone modi/uniFB01cations. On the other hand, cancer cells are character-
ized by global DNA hypomethylation and selective promoter-localized
hypermethylation. Indeed, it has become evident that tumor sup-
pressor genes are sometimes silenced by hypermethylation of pro-
moter sequences, rather than by mutation. In addition, genome-wide
hypomethylation has been shown to cause chromosomal instability
and to induce tumors in mice. Thus, epigenetic changes may in/uniFB02uence
carcinogenesis in many ways. As an added wrinkle, deep sequencing of
cancer genomes has identi /uniFB01ed mutations in genes that regulate
epigenetic modi/uniFB01cations in many cancers. Thus, certain genetic
changes in cancers may be selected because they lead to epigenetic
alterations (e.g., DNA methylation and histone modi /uniFB01cations) that
favor cancer growth and survival.
CARCINOGENESIS: A MULTISTEP PROCESS
Carcinogenesis is a multistep process resulting from the accumu-
lation of multiple genetic alterations that collectively give rise to the
transformed phenotype and all of its associated hallmarks,discussed
later. As mentioned earlier, the presence of driver mutations in some
nonneoplastic precursor lesions suggests the need for additional mu-
tations for transition to a full-blown cancer and thus supports this
model.
Beyond tumor initiation from a single founding cell, it is
important to recognize that cancers continue to undergo Darwinian
selection and therefore continue to evolve ( Fig. 6.14).It is well
established that during their course cancers generally become more
aggressive and acquire greater malignant potential, a phenomenon
referred to astumor progression.At the molecular level, tumor pro-
gression most likely results from mutations that accumulate inde-
pendently in different cells. Some of these mutations may be lethal, but
others may affect the function of cancer genes, thereby making the
affected cells more adept at growth, survival, invasion, metastasis, or
immune evasion. Due to this selective advantage, subclones that ac-
quire these mutations may come to dominate one area of a tumor,
either at the primary site or at sites of metastasis. As a result of
continuing mutation and Darwinian selection, even though ma-
lignant tumors are monoclonal in origin they are typically geneti-
cally heterogeneous by the time of their clinical presentation. In
advanced tumors exhibiting genetic instability, the extent of genetic
heterogeneity may be enormous.
Genetic evolution shaped by Darwinian selection can explain
the two most pernicious properties of cancers: the tendency over
time for cancers to become both more aggressive and less
responsive to therapy.Thus, genetic heterogeneity has implications
not only for cancer progression but also for response to therapy.
Experience has shown that when tumors recur after chemotherapy,
the recurrent tumor is almost always resistant to the original drug
regimen if it is given again. Experimental data suggest that this
acquired resistance stems from the outgrowth of subclones that have,
by chance, mutations (or epigenetic alterations) that confer drug
resistance.
Healthy cell
Carcinogen-induced
mutation
Additional driver
mutations
First driver
mutation
Passenger
mutations
Additional mutations,
emergence of
subclones
Accumulation of driver and
passenger mutations
Initiated precursor with
stem-cell−like properties
Initiating mutation Acquisition of
cancer hallmarks
Further genetic
evolution
Founding
cancer cell
Genetically
heterogeneous
cancer
Diagnosis
FIG. 6.14Development of cancer through stepwise accumulation of complementary driver mutations. The
order in which various driver mutations occur is usually unknown and may vary from tumor to tumor.
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 199
ŞEKİL 6.14 Tamamlayıcı sürücü mutasyonlarının kademeli birikimi yoluyla 
kanserin gelişimi. Çeşitli sürücü mutasyonlarının meydana gelme sırası 
genellikle bilinmemektedir ve tümörden tümöre değişebilir.
48. Ders15 –GenelÖzet
•Neoplazi:
–Genetikveepigenetik bozukluklaradayalıyeni büyüme
•İyihuylu–kötühuyluayrımı:
–Diferansiyasyon/anaplazi
–Lokalinvazyon
–Metastaz
•Terminoloji:
–“-oma” , sarkom, karsinom, karma tümör, teratom, özelisimler
•Temelonkolojikkavramlar:
–Klonalköken, tümörilerlemesi
–Genomikistikrarsızlıkvekronikenflamasyonunrolü
KAYNAKÇA
METİN
•Robbins& Kumar Basic Pathology(11. Baskı)
RESİMLER
1.Robbins& Kumar Basic Pathology(11. Baskı)