Prof. Dr.  Hikmet KELEŞ
KARSİNOJENEZİN MOLEKÜLER TEMELİ

1. Ders 16 –Karsinojenezin Moleküler Temeli
• İçerik:
– Kansergen sınıfları
– Temelgenetiklezyonlar
– Epigenetik vemikroRNA’lar
– GenomikinstabiliteveDNA onarımı
– Kimyasal, fizikselvemikrobiyalkarsinojenler
– Tümörüdestekleyenenflamasyon
• Amaç:
– Karsinogenezinhücreselvemolekülertemelinikavramak
2. KanserGenleri–GenelKavram
•Kansergenleri:
–Kanserlerdetekrartekrarmutasyonauğrayangenlerdir
–Hücreyebüyümeveyasağkalımavantajısağlar
•Mutasyonlar:
–Çoğusomatik
–Bir kısmıgerm hattı(aileselsendromlar)
•Sonuç:
–Kanserinayırtediciözelliklerininkazanımı(Şekil6.15)
HALLMARKS OF CANCER
As mentioned earlier, bona/uniFB01de cancer genes number in the hundreds,
at a minimum. While it is traditional to describe the function of cancer
genes one gene at a time, the blizzard of mutated genes emerging from
the sequencing of cancer genomes has blanketed the landscape and
revealed the limitations of trying to grasp the fundamental properties
of cancer gene by gene. A more tractable and conceptually satisfying
way to think about the biology of cancer is to consider the common
phenotypic and biologic properties of cancer cells. It appears that all
cancers display several fundamental changes in cell physiology,
which are considered the hallmarks of cancer. These changes,
illustrated inFig. 6.15, consist of the following:
•Self-suf/uniFB01ciency in growth signals
•Insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals
•Altered cellular metabolism
•Evasion of apoptosis
•Limitless replicative potential (immortality)
•Sustained angiogenesis
•Invasion and metastasis
•Evasion of immune surveillance
The acquisition of the genetic and epigenetic alterations that confer
these hallmarks may be accelerated bycancer-promoting in/uniFB02ammation
and bygenomic instability. These are considered enabling character-
istics because they aid and abet cellular transformation and subsequent
tumor progression.
Mutations in genes that regulate some or all these cellular traits are
seen in every cancer; accordingly, these traits form the basis of the
following discussion of the molecular origins of cancer. Of note, by
convention, gene symbols are italicized but their protein products are
not (e.g.,RBgene and RB protein,TP53and p53,MYCand MYC).
Self-Sufficiency in Growth Signals
The self-suf/uniFB01ciency in growth that characterizes cancer cells
generally stems from gain-of-function mutations that convert
proto-oncogenes to oncogenes.Oncogenes encode proteins called
oncoproteinsthat promote cell growth even in the absence of normal
growth-promoting signals. To appreciate how oncogenes drive inap-
propriate cell growth, it is helpful to review the sequence of events that
characterize normal cell proliferation. Under physiologic conditions,
signals that drive cell proliferation can be resolved into the following
steps:
1. Binding of a growth factor to its speci /uniFB01c receptor on the cell
membrane
2. Transient and limited activation of the growth factor receptor,
which in turn activates several signal-transducing proteins on the
inner lea/uniFB02et of the plasma membrane
3. Transmission of the transduced signal across the cytosol to the nu-
cleus by second messengers or a cascade of signal transduction
molecules
4. Induction and activation of nuclear regulatory factors that initiate
and regulate DNA transcription and thus the biosynthesis of other
cellular components that are needed for cell division, such as or-
ganelles, membrane components, and ribosomes
5. Entry and progression of the cell into the cell cycle, resulting ulti-
mately in cell division
The mechanisms that endow cancer cells with the ability to pro-
liferate can be grouped according to their role in the growth factor e
induced signal transduction cascade and cell cycle regulation. Indeed,
each one of the steps listed above is susceptible to perturbation in
cancer cells.
Growth Factors
Cancers may secrete their own growth factors or induce stromal
cells in the tumor microenvironment to produce growth factors.
Most growth factors are made by one cell type and act on a neigh-
boring cell of a different type to stimulate proliferation (paracrine
action). Normally, cells that produce the growth factor do not express
that factor’s receptor, preventing the formation of positive feedback
loops within the same cell. This“rule”is broken by certain cancers in
several ways.
•Some cancer cells acquire the ability to synthesize the same growth
factors to which they are responsive. For example, many glioblas-
tomas secrete platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and have am-
pli/uniFB01cations of the PDGF receptor gene, and many sarcomas secrete
transforming growth factor-a(TGF-a) and express its receptor.
Similar autocrine loops are fairly common in other types of cancer
as well.
•In other cancers, the tumor cells send signals that induce normal
cells in the supporting stroma to produce growth factors that feed-
back to stimulate tumor growth.
Growth Factor Receptors
Next in the sequence of progrowth signaling is growth factor receptors,
many of which have intrinsic kinase activity when activated by growth
factor binding.Many of the myriad growth factor receptors function
as oncoproteins when they are mutated or if they are overexpressed.
The best-documented examples of overexpression involve the
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor family. ERBB1, the EGF re-
ceptor, is overexpressed in 80% of squamous cell carcinomas of the
lung, 50% or more of glioblastomas, and 80% to 100% of epithelial
tumors of the head and neck. As mentioned earlier, the gene encoding a
related receptor, HER2 (ERBB2), is ampli/uniFB01ed in approximately 20% of
breast cancers and in a smaller fraction of adenocarcinomas of the lung,
ovary, stomach, and salivary glands. The signi/uniFB01cance of HER2 in the
pathogenesis of breast cancers is illustrated dramatically by the clinical
Sustaining
proliferative
signaling
Inducing
angiogenesis
Activating
invasion and
metastasis
Deregulating
cellular
energetics
Resisting
cell death
Enabling
replicative
immortality
Tumor-
promoting
inflammation
Evading growth
suppressors
Avoiding immune
destruction
Genomic instability
(mutator phenotype)
FIG. 6.15Eight cancer hallmarks and two enabling factors (genomic
instability and tumor-promoting in/uniFB02ammation). Most cancer cells acquire
these properties during their development, typically due to mutations in
critical genes. (From Hanahan D, Weinberg RA: Hallmarks of cancer: the
next generation.Cell144:646, 2011.)
200 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.15 Sekiz kanser 
özelliği ve iki 
etkinleştiricifaktör 
(genomikistikrarsızlık ve 
tümör gelişimini 
destekleyen 
inflamasyon). Çoğu 
kanser hücresi, 
genellikle kritik 
genlerdeki mutasyonlar 
nedeniyle, gelişimleri 
sırasında bu özellikleri 
kazanır. (HanahanD, WeinbergRA'dan: Kanser özellikleri: yeni nesil. Cell 
144:646, 2011.)
3. KanserGenlerininDörtAna Sınıfı
•Onkogenler:
–Proto-onkogenlerinişlevkazanımımutasyonları
–Büyümeyiteşvikedenonkoproteinlerkodlar
•Tümörbaskılayıcıgenler:
–Hücreproliferasyonunuvegenombütünlüğünüfrenler
•Apoptozudüzenleyengenler:
–Hücresağkalımınıveyaölümübelirler
•Tümör–konak etkileşiminidüzenleyengenler:
–Anjiyogenez, invazyon, bağışıklıkkaçışı
4. Onkogenler–TemelÖzellikler
•Proto-onkogen→ onkogen:
–İşlevkazanımımutasyonuile
•Onkoproteinler:
–Normal sinyalmoleküllerinebenzer
–Ancakaşırı, uygunsuzveyaotonomaktiftir
•Genetik:
–Tek aleldemutasyongenellikleyeterlidir
–Dominantetki(onkogenaktivitesi)
5. TümörBaskılayıcıGenler–TemelÖzellikler
•Normal işlev:
–Hücrebüyümesinivebölünmesinisınırlar
–Genomhasarınıalgılarveonarımıtetikler
•İşlevkaybı:
–Büyümefrenlerinikaldırır
–Genetikhasarınbirikmesineizinverir
•Genetik:
–Çoğudurumdaikialelinde inaktivasyonugerekir
–“İkivuruşhipotezi” (two-hit) konsepti
6. ApoptozuDüzenleyenGenler
•İçyolak(mitokondriyalyol):
–BCL2 protein ailesitarafındankontroledilir
•Proapoptotiküyeler:
–BAX, BAK
•Antiapoptotiküyeler:
–BCL2, BCL-XL vb.
•Kanserdesık:
–Apoptozutetikleyensinyallerinblokajı
–Hücreölümünedirenç
7. Tümör–Konak EtkileşimGenleri
•Anjiyogenezregülatörleri:
–VaskülerEndotelyalBüyümeFaktörü(VEGF)
–Tümörbaskılayıcıp53, trombospondin-1
•İnvazyonvemetastazgenleri:
–Matriksmetalloproteinazlar(MMP’ler)
–E-kadherin, integrinler
•Bağışıklıkregülasyonu:
–ProgramlanmışHücreÖlümüLigandı1 (PD-L1)
–ProgramlanmışHücreÖlümü1 (PD-1), SitotoksikT LenfositAntijeni4 
(CTLA-4)
8. GenetikLezyonTürleri–Özet
•1-Noktamutasyonlar
•2-Kromozomalyenidendüzenlemeler:
–Translokasyon, inversiyon
•3-Kopyasayısıdeğişiklikleri:
–Delesyon, amplifikasyon
•4-Anöploidi(kromozomsayısıbozukluğu)
•5-MikroRNAdeğişiklikleri
•6-Epigenetik modifikasyonlar:
–DNA metilasyonu, histondeğişiklikleri
9. NoktaMutasyonlar
•Proto-onkogenlerde:
–Fonksiyonkazanımı→ onkogenaktivasyonu
–Örnek:
• RAS gen ailesindeaktivasyon
•Tümörbaskılayıcıgenlerde:
–Fonksiyonkaybı
–Örnek:
• TP53 genindeinaktiveedicimutasyonlar
•Sıklık:
–Birçoksolid tümördebaskınlezyontipi
10. Gen YenidenDüzenlemeleri–Translokasyonlar
•Kromozomlararasısegment değişimi
•İkitemeletki:
–Proto-onkogeningüçlüpromotör/ enhancer altınataşınması:
•Aşırıekspresyon
–Füzyongen oluşumu:
•Yeni kimerikonkoprotein
•Hematolojikmalignitelerdesık:
–Lösemivelenfomalar(Şekil6.12)
Driver and Passenger Mutations
Driver mutations are mutations that alter the function of cancer
genes and thereby directly contribute to the development or pro-
gression of cancer.They are usually acquired, but as mentioned
earlier, occasionally inherited. By contrast, passenger mutationsare
acquired mutations that are neutral in terms of /uniFB01tness and do not
affect cellular behavior. Because they occur at random, passenger
mutations are sprinkled throughout the genome, whereas driver mu-
tations tend to be tightly clustered within cancer genes. It is now
appreciated that passenger mutations may greatly outnumber driver
mutations, particularly in cancers caused by carcinogen exposure, such
as melanoma and smoking-related lung cancer.
Although apparently innocuous in nature, passenger mutations are
important in several ways:
•In carcinogen-associated cancers, analysis of passenger mutations
has provided de/uniFB01nitive evidence that most genomic damage is
directly caused by the carcinogen in question. For example, before
sequencing of melanoma genomes, the causative role of sun expo-
sure in this cancer was debated. This is no longer so, as most mel-
anomas have thousands of passenger mutations of a type that is
speci/uniFB01cally linked to damage caused by ultraviolet light.
•One effect of passenger mutations is that they create genetic vari-
ants that, while initially neutral, may provide tumor cells with a
selective advantage in the setting of therapy. The evidence for
this comes from DNA sequence analyses of tumors at the time
of recurrence after drug therapy. In many instances, mutations
that lead directly to drug resistance are found in most tumor cells,
generally in the target of the drug (e.g., a tyrosine kinase like BCR-
ABL, described later). Generally, the same resistance mutations
can also be found before therapy, but only in a very small fraction
of cells. In such instances, it appears that the selective pressure of
therapy“converts”a neutral passenger mutation into a driver mu-
tation, contributing to tumor progression.
•Passenger mutations produce altered proteins that elicit host im-
mune responses. The signi/uniFB01cance of this will become apparent
when we discuss cancer immunity and immunotherapy.
Point Mutations
Point mutations can either activate or inactivate the protein
products of the affected genes depending on their precise position
and consequence.Point mutations that convert proto-oncogenes into
oncogenes generally produce a gain of function by altering amino acid
residues in a domain that normally holds the protein ’s activity in
check. A cardinal example is point mutations that convert the proto-
oncogeneRASinto a cancer gene, one of the most common events in
human cancers. By contrast, point mutations in tumor suppressor
genes reduce or disable the function of the encoded protein. The
tumor suppressor gene that is most commonly affected by point
mutations in cancer isTP53,a prototypical tumor suppressor gene
(discussed later).
Gene Rearrangements
Gene rearrangements may be produced by chromosomal trans-
locations, inversions, deletions, or other more complex genetic
events.Speci/uniFB01c gene rearrangements are highly associated with certain
malignancies, particularly neoplasms derived from hematopoietic cells
and other kinds of mesenchymal cells. These rearrangements can
activate proto-oncogenes in two ways:
•Some gene rearrangements result in overexpression of proto-
oncogenes by removing them from their normal regulatory
elements and placing them under control of a highly active
promoter or enhancer.Two different types of B-cell lymphoma
provide illustrative examples of this mechanism. In more than
90% of cases ofBurkitt lymphoma,the cells have a balanced recip-
rocal translocation, usually between chromosomes 8 and 14, that
leads to overexpression of the MYCgene on chromosome 8 by
juxtaposition ofMYCwith immunoglobulin heavy chain gene reg-
ulatory elements on chromosome 14 (Fig. 6.12). Infollicular lym-
phoma,a balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes
14 and 18 leads to overexpression of the antiapoptotic gene BCL2
on chromosome 18, also driven by immunoglobulin gene regula-
tory elements.
•Other oncogenic gene rearrangements create fusion genes
encoding novel chimeric proteins.Most notable is the Philadel-
phia (Ph) chromosome in chronic myeloid leukemia ( Chapter
10), which is usually created by a balanced reciprocal translocation
between chromosomes 9 and 22 (see Fig. 6.12). This cytogenetic
change is seen in more than 90% of cases of chronic myeloid leu-
kemia and results in the fusion of portions of the BCRgene on
chromosome 22 and theABLgene on chromosome 9. The few
Philadelphia chromosomeenegative cases harbor cryptic (karyo-
typically invisible)BCR-ABLfusion genes, the presence of which
is thesine qua nonof chronic myeloid leukemia. As discussed later,
theBCR-ABLfusion gene encodes a novel tyrosine kinase with
potent transforming activity.
CHROMOSOMES
WITH BREAKS
CML
Tyrosine
kinase
inhibitor
Tyrosine
kinase
Activation of growth
factor signaling pathways
Increased expression of
progrowth genes
Increased
MYC protein
BCR
locus
IG
gene
IG
gene
BCR
locus
ABL
oncogene
MYC
oncogene
MYC
oncogene
ABL
oncogene
ABL-BCR
hybrid gene
9 22 der 9 der 22
(Philadelphia
chromosome)
CHROMOSOMES
WITH BREAKS
BURKITT
L YMPHOMA
8 14 der 8 der 14
FIG. 6.12Chromosomal translocations, involved oncogenes, and
downstream oncogenic activities in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and
Burkitt lymphoma.der, Derivative.
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 197
ŞEKİL 6.12 Kronik miyeloidlösemi (KML) ve 
Burkittlenfomasındakromozomal
translokasyonlar, ilgili onkogenlerve aşağı 
yönlü onkogenikaktiviteler . der, Türev.
11. TranslokasyonÖrnekleri–Lenfomalar
•Burkitt lenfoma:
–(8;14) translokasyonu(vevaryantları)
–MYC onkogenininimmunoglobulin ağırzincirlokusunataşınması
–MYC aşırıekspresyonu
•Folikülerlenfoma:
–(14;18) translokasyonu
–BCL2 genininimmunoglobulin ağırzincirlokusunataşınması
–BCL2 aşırıekspresyonu→ apoptozbaskılanması
12. TranslokasyonÖrneği–BCR-ABL Füzyonu
•Kronikmiyeloidlösemi:
–Philadelphia kromozomu:
• (9;22) translokasyonu(Şekil6.12)
–BCR-ABL füzyongeni:
• Konstitütifaktiftirozinkinaz
•Sonuç:
–Hücreproliferasyonuvesağkalımıartar
•Klinik:
–BCR-ABL tirozinkinazinhibitörleri(ör. imatinib) ilehedefeyöneliktedavi
mümkündür
Driver and Passenger Mutations
Driver mutations are mutations that alter the function of cancer
genes and thereby directly contribute to the development or pro-
gression of cancer.They are usually acquired, but as mentioned
earlier, occasionally inherited. By contrast, passenger mutationsare
acquired mutations that are neutral in terms of /uniFB01tness and do not
affect cellular behavior. Because they occur at random, passenger
mutations are sprinkled throughout the genome, whereas driver mu-
tations tend to be tightly clustered within cancer genes. It is now
appreciated that passenger mutations may greatly outnumber driver
mutations, particularly in cancers caused by carcinogen exposure, such
as melanoma and smoking-related lung cancer.
Although apparently innocuous in nature, passenger mutations are
important in several ways:
•In carcinogen-associated cancers, analysis of passenger mutations
has provided de/uniFB01nitive evidence that most genomic damage is
directly caused by the carcinogen in question. For example, before
sequencing of melanoma genomes, the causative role of sun expo-
sure in this cancer was debated. This is no longer so, as most mel-
anomas have thousands of passenger mutations of a type that is
speci/uniFB01cally linked to damage caused by ultraviolet light.
•One effect of passenger mutations is that they create genetic vari-
ants that, while initially neutral, may provide tumor cells with a
selective advantage in the setting of therapy. The evidence for
this comes from DNA sequence analyses of tumors at the time
of recurrence after drug therapy. In many instances, mutations
that lead directly to drug resistance are found in most tumor cells,
generally in the target of the drug (e.g., a tyrosine kinase like BCR-
ABL, described later). Generally, the same resistance mutations
can also be found before therapy, but only in a very small fraction
of cells. In such instances, it appears that the selective pressure of
therapy“converts”a neutral passenger mutation into a driver mu-
tation, contributing to tumor progression.
•Passenger mutations produce altered proteins that elicit host im-
mune responses. The signi/uniFB01cance of this will become apparent
when we discuss cancer immunity and immunotherapy.
Point Mutations
Point mutations can either activate or inactivate the protein
products of the affected genes depending on their precise position
and consequence.Point mutations that convert proto-oncogenes into
oncogenes generally produce a gain of function by altering amino acid
residues in a domain that normally holds the protein ’s activity in
check. A cardinal example is point mutations that convert the proto-
oncogeneRASinto a cancer gene, one of the most common events in
human cancers. By contrast, point mutations in tumor suppressor
genes reduce or disable the function of the encoded protein. The
tumor suppressor gene that is most commonly affected by point
mutations in cancer isTP53,a prototypical tumor suppressor gene
(discussed later).
Gene Rearrangements
Gene rearrangements may be produced by chromosomal trans-
locations, inversions, deletions, or other more complex genetic
events.Speci/uniFB01c gene rearrangements are highly associated with certain
malignancies, particularly neoplasms derived from hematopoietic cells
and other kinds of mesenchymal cells. These rearrangements can
activate proto-oncogenes in two ways:
•Some gene rearrangements result in overexpression of proto-
oncogenes by removing them from their normal regulatory
elements and placing them under control of a highly active
promoter or enhancer.Two different types of B-cell lymphoma
provide illustrative examples of this mechanism. In more than
90% of cases ofBurkitt lymphoma,the cells have a balanced recip-
rocal translocation, usually between chromosomes 8 and 14, that
leads to overexpression of the MYCgene on chromosome 8 by
juxtaposition ofMYCwith immunoglobulin heavy chain gene reg-
ulatory elements on chromosome 14 (Fig. 6.12). Infollicular lym-
phoma,a balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes
14 and 18 leads to overexpression of the antiapoptotic gene BCL2
on chromosome 18, also driven by immunoglobulin gene regula-
tory elements.
•Other oncogenic gene rearrangements create fusion genes
encoding novel chimeric proteins.Most notable is the Philadel-
phia (Ph) chromosome in chronic myeloid leukemia ( Chapter
10), which is usually created by a balanced reciprocal translocation
between chromosomes 9 and 22 (see Fig. 6.12). This cytogenetic
change is seen in more than 90% of cases of chronic myeloid leu-
kemia and results in the fusion of portions of the BCRgene on
chromosome 22 and theABLgene on chromosome 9. The few
Philadelphia chromosomeenegative cases harbor cryptic (karyo-
typically invisible)BCR-ABLfusion genes, the presence of which
is thesine qua nonof chronic myeloid leukemia. As discussed later,
theBCR-ABLfusion gene encodes a novel tyrosine kinase with
potent transforming activity.
CHROMOSOMES
WITH BREAKS
CML
Tyrosine
kinase
inhibitor
Tyrosine
kinase
Activation of growth
factor signaling pathways
Increased expression of
progrowth genes
Increased
MYC protein
BCR
locus
IG
gene
IG
gene
BCR
locus
ABL
oncogene
MYC
oncogene
MYC
oncogene
ABL
oncogene
ABL-BCR
hybrid gene
9 22 der 9 der 22
(Philadelphia
chromosome)
CHROMOSOMES
WITH BREAKS
BURKITT
L YMPHOMA
8 14 der 8 der 14
FIG. 6.12Chromosomal translocations, involved oncogenes, and
downstream oncogenic activities in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and
Burkitt lymphoma.der, Derivative.
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 197
ŞEKİL 6.12 Kronik miyeloidlösemi (KML) ve 
Burkittlenfomasındakromozomal
translokasyonlar, ilgili onkogenlerve aşağı 
yönlü onkogenikaktiviteler . der, Türev.
13. Gen DelesyonlarıveTümörBaskılayıcıGenler
•Kromozomsegment kaybı:
–Tümörbaskılayıcıgenlerinkaybınayolaçar
•Örnekler:
–13q14 delesyonu→ RB gen kaybı(retinoblastom, osteosarkom)
–17p delesyonu→ TP53 gen kaybı
•Sıklık:
–Çoksayıdasolid tümördedelesyonlarlabialeliktümörbaskılayıcı
inaktivasyonu
14. Gen Amplifikasyonları
•Gen kopyasayısındaartış
–Onkogenürünününaşırıekspresyonu
•Sitogenetikbulgular:
–Çiftdakikalar(double minutes)
–Homojenboyananbölgeler
•Örnekler:
–MYCN amplifikasyonu:
• Nöroblastomlardakötüprognoz(Şekil6.13)
–HER2 (ERBB2) amplifikasyonu:
• Meme karsinomlarının≈%20’sinde
• HER2 hedeflitedaviyeyanıtbelirleyici
Sitogenetikteçift dakikalar (doubleminutes-
dmin),hücre çekirdeğinde normal kromozomların 
dışında bulunan,sentromeriolmayan (asentrik), 
küçük ve genellikle dairesel kromozom dışı DNA 
(ecDNA) parçaları
Lymphoid tumors are most commonly associated with recurrent
gene rearrangements. This relationship exists because normal lym-
phocytes express special enzymes that are intended to introduce
DNA breaks during the processes of immunoglobulin or T-cell re-
ceptor gene recombination. Repair of these DNA breaks is error
prone, and the resulting mistakes sometimes result in gene rear-
rangements that activate proto-oncogenes. Two other types of
mesenchymal tumors, myeloid neoplasms (acute myeloid leukemias
and myeloproliferative neoplasms) and sarcomas, also frequently
possess gene rearrangements. Unlike lymphoid neoplasms, the cause
of the DNA breaks that lead to gene rearrangements in myeloid
neoplasms and sarcomas is unknown. In general, the rearrangements
that are seen in myeloid neoplasms and sarcomas create fusion genes
that encode either hyperactive tyrosine kinases (akin to BCR-ABL) or
novel oncogenic transcription factors. A well-characterized example
of the latter is the (11;22)(q24;q12) translocation in Ewing sarcoma
(Chapter 19) that creates a fusion gene encoding a chimeric onco-
protein composed of portions of two different transcription factors
called EWS and FLI1.
Identi/uniFB01cation of pathogenic gene rearrangements in carcinomas
has lagged because karyotypically evident translocations and in-
versions (which point to the location of important oncogenes) are rare
in carcinomas. However, widespread sequencing of cancer genomes
has revealed recurrent cryptic pathogenic gene rearrangements in
carcinomas as well. As with hematologic malignancies and sarcomas,
gene rearrangements in carcinoma contribute to carcinogenesis either
by increasing expression of an oncogene or by generation of a novel
fusion gene. Examples will be discussed in other chapters. As with a
fusion gene such asBCR-ABL,some of the proteins encoded by fusion
genes in carcinomas are also drug targets (e.g., EML-ALK in lung
cancer;Chapter 11).
Deletions
Recurrent deletion of speci/uniFB01c regions of chromosomes in cancer
cells usually results in the loss of particular tumor suppressor
genes.Tumor suppressive functions generally require inactivation of
both alleles before antioncogenic activities are lost. A common
mechanism is for an inactivating point mutation to occur in one
allele and a deletion to occur in the other. As discussed later, de-
letions involving chromosome 13q14, the site of the RBgene, are
associated with retinoblastoma, and deletion of chromosome 17p is
associated with loss of TP53,perhaps the most important tumor
suppressor gene.
Gene Amplifications
Proto-oncogenes may be converted to oncogenes by gene ampli /uniFB01-
cation, with consequent overexpression and hyperactivity of
otherwise normal proteins.Such ampli/uniFB01cation may produce up to
several hundred copies of a gene, a change in copy number that is
readily detected by molecular hybridization with appropriate DNA
probes. In some cases, the ampli /uniFB01ed genes produce chromosomal
changes that can be identi/uniFB01ed microscopically. Two patterns are seen:
(1) multiple small, extrachromosomal structures calleddouble minutes
and (2)homogeneously staining regions. The latter derive from the
insertion of the ampli/uniFB01ed genes into new chromosomal locations,
which may be distant from the normal location of the involved genes.
Because regions containing ampli/uniFB01ed genes lack normal banding, they
have a homogeneous staining pattern in a G-banded karyotype. Two
clinically important examples of ampli/uniFB01cation involve theMYCNgene
in neuroblastoma and theHER2gene in breast cancers. In 25% to 30%
of neuroblastomas,MYCNis ampli/uniFB01ed, a feature that is associated
with poor prognosis ( Fig. 6.13).HER2(also known as ERBB2)
ampli/uniFB01cation occurs in about 20% of breast cancers, and therapy
directed against the receptor encoded by the HER2gene is highly
effective in this subset of tumors.
Aneuploidy
Aneuploidyis de/uniFB01ned as a number of chromosomes that is not a
multiple of the haploid state; for humans, that is any chromosome
number that is not a multiple of 23. Aneuploidy is remarkably
common in cancers and was proposed as a cause of carcinogenesis
over 100 years ago. It frequently results from errors of the mitotic
checkpoint, a major cell cycle control mechanism that prevents mis-
takes in chromosome segregation by inhibiting the transition to
anaphase until all of the replicated chromosomes have attached to
spindle microtubules.
Mechanistic data establishing aneuploidy as a cause of carcino-
genesis, rather than a consequence, have been dif /uniFB01cult to generate.
However, detailed analysis of cancer cells suggests that aneuploidy
increases the copy number of key oncogenes and decreases the copy
number of potent tumor suppressors. For example, chromosome 8,
which is almost never lost and is often present in increased copies in
tumor cells, is where the MYConcogene is located. By contrast,
portions of chromosome 17, where theTP53gene is located, are often
lost and infrequently gained. Thus, tumor development and progres-
sion may be molded by changes in chromosome numbers that
enhance the dosage of oncogenes or decrease the dosage of tumor
suppressor genes.
MicroRNAs and Cancer
As discussed inChapter 4, microRNAs (miRNAs) are short, non-
coding, single-stranded RNAs that function as negative regulators of
Normal
MYCN
MYCN
2p
5q HSR
Double
minutes
HSR
Amplification
of MYCN
FIG. 6.13Ampli/uniFB01cation of theMYCNgene in human neuroblastoma.
TheMYCNgene, present normally on chromosome 2p, becomes
ampli/uniFB01ed and is seen either as extrachromosomal double minutes or as a
chromosomally integrated homogeneous-staining region (HSR). (Modi-
/uniFB01ed from Brodeur GM, Seeger RC, Sather H, et al: Clinical implications of
oncogene activation in human neuroblastomas. Cancer58:541, 1986.
Reprinted by permission of Wiley-Liss, Inc, a subsidiary of John Wiley&
Sons, Inc.)
198 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.13 İnsan nöroblastomunda
MYCN geninin amplifikasyonu.
Normalde 2p kromozomunda 
bulunan MYCN geni,
amplifiyeolur ve ya kromozom dışı 
çift dakikalar ya da kromozoma 
entegre homojen boyama bölgesi 
(HSR) olarak görülür. (BrodeurGM, SeegerRC, SatherH, vd.: İnsan 
nöroblastomlarındaonkogenaktivasyonunun klinik etkileri. Cancer58:541, 1986'dan uyarlanmıştır. John Wiley& Sons, Inc.'in bir yan kuruluşu 
olan Wiley-Liss, Inc.'in izniyle yeniden basılmıştır.)
15. Anöploidi
•Anöploidi:
–Haploid sayınınkatıolmayankromozomsayısı
–Örn. insanda23’ün katıolmayansayı
•Neden:
–Mitozkontrolnoktasıkusurları
–Kromozomayrılmahataları
•Sonuç:
–Onkogendozununartması
–Tümörbaskılayıcıgen dozununazalması
•Kanser:
–Birçoktümördeyaygıngenomikistikrarsızlıkgöstergesi
16. MikroRNA’lar(miRNA) veOnkomirler
•MikroRNA(miRNA):
–KodlamayankısateksarmallıRNA’lar
–HedefmRNA translasyonunubaskılarveyayıkımauğratır
•Kanserde:
–Tümörbaskılayıcıgen mRNA’sınıhedefleyenmiRNA ↑
• Tümörbaskılayıcıprotein ↓
–OnkogenmRNA’sınıbaskılayanmiRNA kaybı
• Onkoprotein↑
•“Onkomir”:
–OnkojeniketkiyesahipmiRNA
17. Epigenetik Değişiklikler
•Epigenetik:
–DNA dizisideğişmedengen ekspresyonununkalıcıdeğişimi
•Başlıcamekanizmalar:
–DNA metilasyonu
–Histonmodifikasyonları
•Kanserdetipik:
–Global DNA hipometilasyonu:
• Genomikinstabiliteyekatkı
–Tümörbaskılayıcıgen promotörlerindehipermetilasyon:
• Ekspresyonunsusturulması
18. Genomikİstikrarsızlık–GenelKavram
•Mutasyonoranınıartıranher durum:
–Genomikinstabiliteyeyolaçar
•DNA onarımkusurları:
–Çoksayıdayolcuvesürücümutasyonbirikimi
•KalıtsalDNA onarımbozuklukları:
–Kanserriskinidramatikartırır
•Somatikbozulmalar:
–Çeşitlisporadikkanserlerdebenzermutasyonimzaları
19. UyumsuzlukOnarımı(MMR) veLynch 
Sendromu
•Uyumsuzlukonarımı:
–DNA replikasyonundayanlışeşleşenbazlarıdüzeltir
•Kalıtsalpolipozsuzkolorektalkansersendromu(Lynch sendromu):
–MMR genlerindenbirindegerm hattımutasyonu
–İkincialeldesomatik“ikincidarbe”
•Mikrosatellitinstabilitesi(MSI):
–1–6 bazlıktekrardizilerininuzunluğundadeğişiklik
–HNPCC tümörlerindevebazısporadikkanserlerdesık
HNPCC: Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer
20. NükleotidEksizyonOnarımıveKseroderma
Pigmentozum
•Ultraviyole(UV) ışınları:
–DNA’dapirimidindimerlerioluşturur
•Nükleotideksizyononarımı:
–Bu lezyonlarıçıkarırveonarır
•Kserodermapigmentozum:
–NER yolundaotozomalresesifkusur
–***Güneşgörenciltte:
•Melanom, skuamözvebazalhücrelikarsinomriskindedramatikartış
21. Homolog RekombinasyonKusurları
•Hastalıkörnekleri:
–Bloom sendromu
–Ataksi–telanjiektazi
–Fanconi anemisi
•Özellikler:
–DNA’yazararverenajanlaraaşırıduyarlılık
–Kromozomalkırıklar, yenidendüzenlemeler
•BRCA1 veBRCA2:
–Homolog rekombinasyontamirindegörevli
–Germ hattımutasyonu:
• Meme, ovaryumvediğerkanserlerderisk artışı
22. DNA Polimeraz“Proofreading” Kusurları
•Normal DNA polimeraz:
–3’→5’ ekzonükleazaktivitesiilehatalarıdüzeltir
•Proofreading kusuru:
–Noktamutasyonoranındabüyükartış
•Klinik:
–Bazıendometrium vekolorektalkarsinomalt tipleri
–Yüksekneoantijenyükü:
•İmmünkontrolnoktasıinhibitörlerineiyiyanıt
23. LenfoidHücrelerdeDüzenlenmişKararsızlık
•Normal adaptifbağışıklık:
–İmmunoglobulinveT hücresireseptörü(TCR) genlerininçeşitlenmesine
dayanır
•Araçlar:
–Recombination Activating Gene 1 ve2 (RAG1, RAG2)
–Activation-Induced Cytidine Deaminase (AID)
•Risk:
–Yanlışrekombinasyonvesınıfdeğişimolayları
–Çeşitlilenfomavelösemilerdegörülentranslokasyonlarıntemelindeyatar
(Bölüm10)
24. EnflamasyonunTümörüDestekleyiciRolü
•İnvazivtümörler:
–Çoğunluklakronikenflamatuarinfiltrasyonilebirlikte
•Tümörleilişkilienflamatuarhücreler:
–Makrofajlar, nötrofiller, lenfositler
•Etkiler:
–Büyümeyi, anjiyogenezi, invazyonuvebağışıklıkkaçışınıdestekler
•Benzerlik:
–İnvazivkanserileiyileşenyarastromasıarasındayakınparalellik
25. EnflamatuarHücrelerinPro-tümörEtkileri
•Büyümeyiuyarıcıfaktörler:
–Epidermal BüyümeFaktörü(EGF), diğerbüyümefaktörleri
•Hücredışımatriksin(ECM) yenidenşekillenmesi:
–Matriksmetalloproteinazlar(MMP’ler)
–Tümörhücregöçüveinvazyonukolaylaşır
•Anjiyogenezartışı:
–VaskülerEndotelyalBüyümeFaktörü(VEGF)
•Bağışıklıkbaskılayıcımikroçevre:
–T düzenleyicihücre(Treg) vemiyeloidkökenlibaskılayıcıhücre(MDSC) 
birikimi
–TransformeEdiciBüyümeFaktörüBeta (TGF-β) üretimi
26. KimyasalKarsinojenler–Genelİlkeler
•Kimyasalkarsinojenler:
–Çoğumutajeniktir
–DNA ilekovalentbağoluşturanelektrofilgruplariçerir
•İkigrup:
–Doğrudanetkilikarsinojenler:
• Metabolikaktivasyonagerekduymaz
–Dolaylıetkilikarsinojenler:
• Vücuttaaktifkanserojenedönüştürülür
•Hedef:
–Onkogenvetümörbaskılayıcıgen mutasyonları(ör. RAS, TP53)
27. DoğrudanEtkiliKarsinojenler
•Özellik:
–Kendileriaktifkanserojendir
•Örnekler:
–Bazıalkilleyicikemoterapiilaçları:
•Hodgkin lenfomagibitümörlerintedavisindekullanılır
•Yıllarsonraakutmiyeloidlösemiriskiniartırabilir
•Klinik:
–Neoplastik olmayanhastalıklarda(ör. romatoidartrit) uzunsüreli
kullanımlarındaikincimaligniteriskidikkatealınmalıdır
28. DolaylıEtkiliKarsinojenler
•Metabolikaktivasyongerektirir
•Önemlisınıflar:
–Polisiklikaromatikhidrokarbonlar:
• Fosilyakıt, tütündumanı, ızgaravetütsülenmişetlerde
• Örn. benzo[a]piren
–Aromatikaminlerveazo boyalar:
• Kimyavekauçukendüstrilerindemesanekanseririski
–AflatoksinB1:
• Aspergillustürleritarafındanüretilir
• Uygunsuzsaklanantahılveyemişlerde
• Hepatosellülerkarsinomilegüçlüilişkili
•Metabolizma:
–ÇoğusitokromP-450 enzimleritarafındanaktiveedilir
29. KimyasalKarsinojenez–BaşlatıcıvePromotörler
(Şekil6.31)
•Başlatıcı(initiator):
–KalıcıDNA hasarı(mutasyon) oluşturur
–Tek dozyeterliolabilir
•Promotör:
–Tek başınatümöroluşturmaz
–Başlatılmışhücrelerinklonalproliferasyonunuuyarır
–Etkiliolmasıiçin:
• Başlatıcıdansonravetekrarlayanmaruziyetgerekir
•Sonuç:
–Ekmutasyonlarveçokaşamalıtümörgelişimi
malignant tumor. Indeed, the concept that sustained cell proliferation
increases the risk for mutagenesis, and hence promotes neoplastic
transformation is also applicable to human carcinogenesis. For example,
endometrial hyperplasia (Chapter 17) and increased regenerative ac-
tivity that accompanies chronic liver cell injury are associated with the
development of cancer in these organs. Were it not for the DNA repair
mechanisms discussed earlier, the incidence of chemically induced
cancers would in all likelihood be much higher. As mentioned previ-
ously, the rare hereditary disorders of DNA repair, including xeroderma
pigmentosum, are associated with greatly increased risk for developing
cancers induced by UV light and certain chemicals.
Radiation Carcinogenesis
Radiation, whatever its source (UV rays of sunlight, radiographs,
nuclear/uniFB01ssion, radionuclides), is carcinogenic.Unprotected miners
of radioactive elements have a 10-fold increased incidence of lung
cancers. A follow-up study of survivors of the atomic bombs dropped
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki disclosed a markedly increased incidence
of leukemia after an average latent period of about 7 years, as well as
increased mortality rates for thyroid, breast, colon, and lung carci-
nomas. The nuclear power accident at Chernobyl in the former Soviet
Union continues to exact its toll in the form of high cancer incidence
in the surrounding areas. Therapeutic irradiation of the head and neck
can also give rise to papillary thyroid cancers years later.
The oncogenic properties of ionizing radiation are related to its
mutagenic effects; it causes chromosome breakage, chromosomal
rearrangements such as translocations and inversions, and, less
frequently, point mutations. Double-stranded DNA breaks seem to be
the most mutagenic form of DNA damage caused by ionizing radiation.
The oncogenic effect of UV rays merits special mention because it
highlights the importance of DNA repair in carcinogenesis. Natural UV
radiation derived from the sun can cause skin cancers (e.g., melanomas,
squamous cell carcinomas, and basal cell carcinomas). At greatest risk
are fair-skinned people who live in locales that receive a great deal of
sunlight (e.g., Australia). Nonmelanoma skin cancers are associated with
total cumulative exposure to UV radiation, whereas melanomas are
associated with intense intermittent exposure das occurs with
sunbathing or tanning beds. UV light has several biologic effects on
cells. Of particular relevance to carcinogenesis is DNA damage resulting
in the formation of pyrimidine dimers, which is typically repaired by the
nucleotide excision repair pathway. With extensive exposure to UV
light, the repair systems may be overwhelmed, resulting in skin cancer.
As mentioned earlier, patients with the inherited disease xeroderma
pigmentosumhave a defect in the nucleotide excision repair pathway
and have a greatly increased predisposition to skin cancers.
Viral and Microbial Oncogenesis
Many DNA and RNA viruses have proved to be oncogenic in animals
as disparate as frogs and primates. Despite intense scrutiny, only a few
viruses have been causally linked with human cancer. Conversely,
however, some of these viruses, particularly human papillomavirus,
Epstein-Barr virus, and hepatitis viruses B and C, are collectively
associated with up to 15% to 20% of cancers worldwide. The following
discussion focuses on human oncogenic viruses. Also discussed is the
role of the bacteriumHelicobacter pyloriin gastric cancer.
Oncogenic RNA Viruses
Although the study of animal retroviruses has provided spectacular
insights into the molecular basis of cancer, including the discovery of
oncogenes, only one human retrovirus, human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1 (HTLV-1), is/uniFB01rmly implicated in the pathogenesis of cancer in
humans.
HTLV-1 causesadult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma(ATLL), a tu-
mor that is endemic in certain parts of Japan, the Caribbean basin,
South America, and Africa, and found sporadically elsewhere,
including the United States.Worldwide, it is estimated that 15 to 20
million people are infected with HTLV-1. Similar to the human im-
munode/uniFB01ciency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS, HTLV-1 has tropism
for CD4þT cells, and hence this subset of T cells is the major target
for neoplastic transformation. Human infection requires transmission
of infected T cells via sexual intercourse, blood products, or breast-
feeding. Leukemia develops in only 3% to 5% of the infected in-
dividuals, typically after a long latent period of 40 to 60 years.
CARCINOGEN
Metabolic
activation
Detoxification
Detoxification
Excretion
DNA
repair
DNA-adducts
Permanent
DNA lesion
Initiated cell
Cell proliferation
Altered differentiation
Proliferation
Additional mutations
PRENEOPLASTIC CLONE
MALIGNANT CLONE
Normal
cell
Cell
death
Electrophilic
intermediate
PROMOTION INITIATION
FIG. 6.31Initiation and promotion of cancer by chemical carcinogens.
Note that carcinogens that act as promoters cause clonal expansion of
the initiated cell, thus producing a preneoplastic clone. Further prolifer-
ation induced by promoters or other factors causes accumulation of
additional mutations and emergence of a malignant tumor.
222 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.31 Kimyasal kanserojenler 
tarafından kanserin başlatılması ve 
ilerletilmesi.Kanser oluşumunu 
destekleyici olarak hareket eden 
kanserojenlerin, başlatılan hücrenin 
klonalgenişlemesine neden olarak 
prekanserözbir klon oluşturduğuna 
dikkat edin.
Bu nedenle, destekleyiciler veya diğer 
faktörler tarafından tetiklenen daha 
fazla çoğalma, ek mutasyonların 
birikmesine ve kötü huylu bir tümörün 
ortaya çıkmasına neden olur .
30. RadyasyonveKarsinogenez
•İyonlaştırıcıradyasyon:
–X-ışınları, gamaışınları, radon, nükleerkazalar
–DNA çiftsarmalkırıkları, translokasyonlar, delesyonlar
•Kanserler:
–Lösemiler(latent dönem≈7 yıl)
–Tiroid, meme, akciğer, kolonkarsinomları
•Örnek:
–Hiroshima/Nagasaki kurtulanları
–Çernobilkazasısonrasıartantiroidkanseri
31. Ultraviyole(UV) RadyasyonveCiltKanserleri
•Kaynak:
–Güneşışığı(özellikleUVB)
•DNA hasarı:
–Pirimidindimerleri
–Nükleotideksizyononarımsistemiileonarılır
•Kanserler:
–Melanom
–Skuamözhücrelikarsinom
–Bazalhücrelikarsinom
•Enbüyükrisk:
–Açıktenli, güneşlibölgedeyaşayankişiler
–Yoğunaralıklımaruziyetözelliklemelanomiçinriskli
32. Viral veMikrobiyalKarsinogenez–Genel
•Üçana mikrobiyalsınıf:
–RNA virüsleri
–DNA virüsleri
–Bakteriler(ör. Helicobacter pylori)
•Dünyakanseryükü:
–İnsanPapilloma Virüsü(HPV), Epstein–Barr Virüs(EBV), HepatitB 
Virüsü(HBV), HepatitC Virüsü(HCV) gibivirüsler:
•Küreselkanserlerin≈%15–20’sinden sorumlu
33. OnkojenikRNA Virüsü–HTLV-1
•İnsanT HücreliLösemiVirüsTip 1 (HTLV-1):
–Retrovirüs, CD4 pozitif(CD4+) T hücretropizmi
•Tümör:
–ErişkinT hücrelilösemi/lenfoma
•Patogenez:
–Viral Tax proteini:
• T hücreproliferasyonunuuyarır
• NükleerFaktörKappa B (NF-κB) vediğerbüyümeyollarınıaktiveeder
–Uzunlatent dönem(40–60 yıl)
–Ekmutasyonlarvegenomikistikrarsızlıkilemonoklonaltransformasyon
34. OnkojenikDNA Virüsleri–Genel
•İnsanPapilloma Virüsü(HPV)
•Epstein–Barr Virüs(EBV)
•Kaposi SarkomuHerpes Virüsü(KSHV, İnsanHerpes Virüsü8 
(HHV-8))
•HepatitB Virüsü(HBV)
•Merkel hücrepoliomavirüsü
•Mekanizmalar:
–Onkoproteinleriletümörbaskılayıcıgenlerininaktivasyonu
–Kronikenflamasyonverejenerasyon
–Genomikinstabilite
35. İnsanPapilloma Virüsü(HPV) veKanser(Şekil
6.32)
• HPV tipleri:
– Düşükrisk: 6, 11 (genital siğiller, benign papillomlar)
– Yüksekrisk: 16, 18 vb.
• Yüksekrisk HPV ilişkilikanserler:
– Servikalskuamözhücrelikarsinom
– Anogenital bölgekarsinomları
– Orofarenksskuamözhücrelikarsinomları
• Viral onkoproteinler:
– E6:
• p53’e bağlanırveyıkımınıartırır
• Telomeraz(TERT) ekspresyonunuuyarır
– E7:
• Retinoblastoma proteini(RB) ileetkileşir, E2F’yi serbestbırakır
• Siklinbağımlıkinazinhibitörüp21’i inhibeeder
• Yüksekrisk tiplerde:
– E6 veE7 p53 veRB’yeyüksekafiniteilebağlanır
There is little doubt that HTLV-1 infection of T lymphocytes is
necessary for leukemogenesis, but the molecular mechanisms of
transformation are not certain. In contrast to several murine retrovi-
ruses, HTLV-1 does not contain an oncogene, and no consistent
pattern of proviral integration next to a proto-oncogene has been
discovered. In leukemic cells, however, viral integration shows a clonal
pattern: although the site of viral integration in host chromosomes is
random (the viral DNA is found at different locations in different
cancers), the site of integration is identical within all cells of a given
cancer. This would not occur if HTLV-1 were merely a passenger that
infects cells after transformation; rather, it means that HTLV-1 must
have been present at the moment of transformation.
The HTLV-1 genome contains thegag, pol, env,and long-terminal-
repeat regions typical of all retroviruses, but, in contrast to other
leukemia viruses, it contains another gene referred to as tax.Tax
protein is essential for viral replication, because it stimulates tran-
scription of viral RNA from the 50long-terminal repeat. However, Tax
also alters the transcription of several host cell genes and interacts with
certain host cell signaling proteins, including the progrowth PI3-
kinase pathway and the transcription factor NF-kB, which promotes
the growth and survival of lymphocytes.
The precise steps that lead to the development of adult T-cell leuke-
mia/lymphoma are not known, but a plausible scenario is as follows.
Infection by HTLV-1 causes the expansion of a nonmalignant polyclonal
cell population through stimulatory effects of Tax on cell proliferation.
The proliferating T cells are at increased risk for mutations and genomic
instability due to the effects of Tax and possibly other viral factors as well.
This instability allows the accumulation of oncogenic mutations and
eventually a monoclonal neoplastic T-cell population emerges.
Oncogenic DNA Viruses
Five DNA virusesdHPV, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi sarcoma
herpesvirus (KSHV, also called human herpesvirus-8 [HHV-8]), a
polyoma virus called Merkel cell virus, and hepatitis B virus
(HBV)dare strongly associated with human cancer. KSHV and
Kaposi sarcoma are discussed in Chapter 8. Merkel cell virus is
associated with a particular cancer, Merkel cell carcinoma, that is too
rare to merit further discussion. The others are presented here. We
also brie/uniFB02y touch on the oncogenic effects of hepatitis C virus, an RNA
virus, during our discussion of HBV, since both viruses share an as-
sociation with chronic liver injury and liver cancer.
Human Papillomavirus.Scores of genetically distinct types of
HPV have been identi/uniFB01ed. Some types (e.g., 1, 2, 4, and 7) cause
benign squamous papillomas (warts) in humans (Chapter 22). Genital
warts are associated with low-risk HPVs, predominantly HPV-6 and
HPV-11, which have minimal malignant potential. By contrast,
high-risk HPVs (e.g., types 16 and 18) cause several cancers,
particularly squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix, anogenital
region, and oropharynx.
The oncogenic potential of HPV can be related to the products of
two viral genes, E6 and E7 (Fig. 6.32), each of which has several ac-
tivities that are prooncogenic.
•Oncogenic activities of E6.The E6 protein binds to and mediates the
degradation of p53 and stimulates the expression of TERT, the cat-
alytic subunit of telomerase, which contributes to the immortaliza-
tion of cells. E6 from high-risk HPV types has a higher af/uniFB01nity for
p53 than E6 from low-risk HPV types, a property that likely con-
tributes to oncogenesis.
•Oncogenic activities of E7.The E7 protein has effects that comple-
ment those of E6, all of which are centered on speeding cells
through the G1-S cell cycle checkpoint. It binds to the RB protein,
releasing the E2F transcription factors that are normally seques-
tered by RB, promoting progression through the cell cycle. As
with E6 proteins and p53, E7 proteins from high-risk HPV types
have a higher af/uniFB01nity for RB than do E7 proteins from low-risk
HPV types. E7 also inactivates the CDK inhibitor p21, another ac-
tivity that promotes cell cycle progression.
An additional factor that contributes to the oncogenic potential of
HPVs is viral integration into the host genome. In precursor cervical
lesions, the HPV genome is maintained in a nonintegrated episomal
form, while in cancers, the HPV genome is randomly integrated into
the host genome. Integration interrupts a negative regulatory region in
the viral DNA, resulting in overexpression of the E6 and E7 onco-
proteins. Furthermore, cells in which the viral genome has integrated
show signi/uniFB01cantly more genomic instability, which may contribute to
acquisition of prooncogenic mutations in host cancer genes.
To summarize,high-risk HPVs encode oncogenic proteins that
inactivate RB, p53, and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21
and upregulate telomerase, thereby promoting immortalization,
cellular proliferation, and resistance to cell death.Thus, it is evident
that HPV proteins promote many of the hallmarks of cancer. The
p53p53 p21
Cyclin
D
CDK4
E2F
RBRB
E2F
E6E6 E7E7
E7E7E6E6
HPV
E6 binds
to p53
Inhibition
of p21
Increased
CDK4/cyclinD
E7 binds
to RB,
freeing E2F
E2F promotes
transcriptional
activation
p53
degradation
Telomere
Telomere
Increased telomerase expression
• IMMORTALIZATION     • INCREASED CELL PROLIFERATION     • GENOMIC INSTABILITY
Inhibition of p53 Cell cycle progression Cell cycle progression
Telomerase
TERT
FIG. 6.32Transforming effects of HPV E6 and E7 proteins. The net effect of HPV E6 and E7 proteins is to
immortalize cells, protect cells from cell death, and remove the restraints on cell proliferation. CDK,Cyclin
dependent kinase;HPV,human papillomavirus;RB,retinoblastoma;TERT,telomerase reverse transcriptase.
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 223
ŞEKİL 6.32 HPV E6 ve E7 proteinlerinin dönüştürücü etkileri. HPV E6 ve E7 
proteinlerinin net etkisi, hücreleri ölümsüzleştirmek, hücreleri hücre 
ölümünden korumak ve hücre çoğalması üzerindeki kısıtlamaları ortadan 
kaldırmaktır . CDK, Siklin bağımlı kinaz; HPV, insan papillomavirüsü; RB, 
retinoblastoma; TERT , telomerazters transkriptaz.
36. HPV’deGenomEntegrasyonuveOnkogenez
•Öncüservikallezyon:
–HPV genomuepisomal(entegrasyonsuz)
•İnvazivkanser:
–HPV DNA’sıkonak genomunaentegredir
–Viral genomdakinegatifdüzenleyicibölgebozulur
–E6 veE7 onkoproteinlerininaşırıekspresyonu
•Sonuç:
–Hücredöngüsününkontrolsüzaktivasyonu
–Apoptozbaskılanması
–Genomikinstabilite
37. Epstein–Barr Virüs(EBV) veB HücreTümörleri
(Şekil6.33)
•EBV:
–Herpes virüsailesiüyesidir
–B lenfositlerienfekteeder(CD21 reseptörü)
•Tümörler:
–Burkitt lenfoma(özellikleendemikAfrika tipi)
–Hodgkin lenfomaalt tipleri
–Nazofaringealkarsinom
–İmmünbaskılanmışhastalardaB hücrelilenfomalar
•Viral proteinler:
–Latent MembranProteini1 (LMP1):
• CD40 sinyalinitakliteder, NF-κByolunuaktiveeder
–Epstein–Barr NükleerAntijen2 (EBNA2):
• SiklinD, SRC ailesigibibüyümeyidestekler
primacy of HPV infection in the causation of cervical cancer is
con/uniFB01rmed by HPV vaccines, which are highly effective in preventing
cervical cancer. However, infection with HPV itself is not suf/uniFB01cient for
carcinogenesis, as the acquisition of mutations in host cancer genes
(e.g.,RAS) is required for full transformation. A signi/uniFB01cant proportion
of women infected with HPV clear the infection by immunologic
mechanisms, but others do not, some because of acquired immune
abnormalities, such as those that result from HIV infection. Women
who are coinfected with high-risk HPV types and HIV are at partic-
ularly high risk for developing cervical cancer.
Epstein-Barr Virus.EBV, a member of the herpesvirus family,
was the/uniFB01rst virus linked to a human tumor, Burkitt lymphoma.
Burkitt lymphoma is an aggressive tumor that is endemic in certain
parts of Africa and occurs sporadically elsewhere. In endemic areas, the
tumor cells in virtually all affected patients carry the EBV genome.
Since its discovery in Burkitt lymphoma, more than 50 years ago, EBV
has been detected within the cells of a surprisingly diverse list of other
tumors, including most nasopharyngeal carcinomas and a subset of
T-cell lymphomas, NK cell lymphomas, Hodgkin lymphoma, gastric
carcinomas, and, in rare instances, smooth muscle tumors, mainly in
patients who are immunosuppressed.
The manner in which EBV causes B-cell tumors such as Burkitt
lymphoma is complex and incompletely understood but best appre-
ciated by considering its effects on normal B cells. EBV uses the
complement receptor CD21 to attach to and infect B cells. In vitro,
such infection leads to polyclonal B-cell proliferation and generation
of immortal B lymphoblastoid cell lines. One EBV-encoded gene,
LMP1(latent membrane protein 1), acts as an oncogene, as proven by
its ability to induce B-cell lymphomas in transgenic mice. LMP1
promotes B-cell proliferation, mimicking the effects of a key surface
receptor known as CD40. CD40 is normally activated by interaction
with CD40 ligand expressed on helper T cells. By contrast, LMP1 is
constitutively active and stimulates signaling through the NF-kB and
JAK/STAT pathways, both of which promote B-cell proliferation and
survival. Thus, the virus“borrows”a normal B-cell activation pathway
to promote its own replication by expanding the pool of infected cells.
Another EBV-encoded protein, EBNA2, activates the expression of
other genes that promote the growth of the infected B cells, including
cyclin D and proto-oncogenes of theSRCfamily. In immunologically
healthy persons, the EBV-driven polyclonal B-cell proliferation is
readily controlled by CTLs, and the affected patient either remains
asymptomatic or experiences a self-limited episode of infectious
mononucleosis. However, a small number of EBV-infected B cells
downregulate expression of immunogenic viral proteins such as
LMP-1 and EBNA2 and remain in a long-lived pool of memory B cells
that persist throughout life.
Given these observations, how then does EBV contribute to the
genesis of endemic Burkitt lymphoma? One possibility is shown in
Fig. 6.33. In regions of the world where Burkitt lymphoma is endemic,
concomitant infections such as malaria impair immune competence,
allowing sustained B-cell proliferation. Eventually, CTLs eliminate
most of the EBV-infected B cells, but a small number survive. It ap-
pears that lymphoma cells emerge from this residual population
following the acquisition of speci/uniFB01c mutations, most notably trans-
locations involving theMYConcogene. In nonendemic areas, 80% of
Burkitt lymphomas are unrelated to EBV, but virtually all endemic and
sporadic tumors possess the (8;14) translocation or other trans-
locations that dysregulate MYC. Thus, although sporadic Burkitt
lymphomas are triggered by mechanisms other than EBV infection,
they appear to develop through similar oncogenic pathways.
The oncogenic role played by EBV is more direct in EBV-
positive B-cell lymphomas in immunosuppressed patients. Some
individuals with AIDS or who receive immunosuppressive therapy to
prevent allograft rejection develop EBV-positive B-cell tumors, often at
multiple sites. These proliferations are polyclonal at the outset but can
evolve into monoclonal neoplasms. In contrast to Burkitt lymphoma,
8
14
Latent
infection
with EBV
Polyclonal
B-cell
proliferation
Increased
MYC protein
Outgrowth of
neoplastic
clone: Burkitt
lymphoma
EBV
EBV receptor
(CD21)
B cell
EBNA2
EBV genome
EBV-specific
cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL)
B-cell killing
by CTL
(B-cell growth
controlled)
LMP1
Additional
mutationsChromosomal
breaks
Downregulation of
EBV gene expression:
Immune escape
Chromosomes
Mutation
(MYC translocation)
FIG. 6.33Possible evolution of EBV-induced Burkitt lymphoma. After establishing a latent infection in B cells,
EBV initially expresses gene products such as EBNA2 and LMP1 that drive the proliferation of the infected
cells. This proliferation is usually controlled by cytotoxic T cells, an immune response that sometimes pro-
duces systemic symptoms (infectious mononucleosis). A small number of infected B cells escape from the
host immune response by downregulating the expression of immunogenic viral proteins, and if these cells
acquire a chromosomal translocation involving theMYCgene on chromosome 8, an aggressive B-cell tumor
(Burkitt lymphoma) may emerge.EBNA2,Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2;EBV,Epstein-Barr virus;LMP1,
latent membrane protein 1.
224 CHAPTER 6Neoplasia
ŞEKİL 6.33 EBV kaynaklı Burkittlenfomasınınolası evrimi. B hücrelerinde latentbir enfeksiyon 
oluşturduktan sonra, EBV başlangıçta enfektehücrelerin çoğalmasını sağlayan EBNA2 ve LMP1 gibi gen 
ürünlerini ifade eder . Bu çoğalma genellikle sitotoksikT hücreleri tarafından kontrol edilir; bu bağışıklık 
yanıtı bazen sistemik semptomlara (enfeksiyözmononükleoz) neden olur . Az sayıda enfekteB hücresi, 
immünojenikviralproteinlerin ekspresyonunu azaltarak konakçı bağışıklık yanıtından kaçar ve bu hücreler 
kromozom 8'deki MYC genini içeren bir kromozomaltranslokasyonkazanırsa, agresif bir B hücreli tümör 
(Burkittlenfoması) ortaya çıkabilir . EBNA2, Epstein-Barrvirüsü nükleer antijeni 2; EBV, Epstein-Barrvirüsü; 
LMP1, latentmembranproteini 1.
38. Helicobacter pyloriveMideKanseri
•Helicobacter pylori:
–Midemukozasındakronikgastritveülsernedenidir
•Kanserleilişkili:
–Mideadenokarsinomu
–MALT lenfoması(ekstranodalmarjinalzonlenfoması)
•Adenokarsinompatogenezi:
–Kronikgastrit→ atrofikgastrit
–İntestinal metaplazi→ displazi→ karsinom
–Aracılar: reaktifoksijentürleri, sitokinler, büyümefaktörleri
•MALT lenfoma:
–AntijenuyarılıB hücreproliferasyonu
–Erken evredeH. pylorieradikasyonuilegerileyebilir
39. Karsinogenez–ÇokAşamalıSüreç(Şekil6.14)
•Karsinogenez:
–Çokaşamalıbirsüreçtir
•Aşamalar:
–Başlangıç(initiation) → kalıcıDNA hasarı
–Promosyon(promotion) → mutasyonauğramışhücrelerinklonal
genişlemesi
–İlerleme(progression) → ekmutasyonlar, agresiffenotip
•Sonuç:
–Tümörhücrepopülasyonundagenetikheterojenlik
–Tedaviyedirençlialt klonlarınseçilimi
genes. They inhibit gene expression posttranscriptionally by repressing
translation or, in some cases, by promoting the cleavage of messenger
RNA (mRNA). In view of their important functions in control of cell
growth, differentiation, and survival, it is not surprising that miRNAs
can also contribute to carcinogenesis. Speci/uniFB01cally, if the target of a
miRNA is a tumor suppressor gene, then overactivity of the miRNA
can reduce the activity of the encoded tumor suppressor protein. Such
miRNAs are sometimes referred to as oncomirs.Conversely, if a
miRNA normally inhibits the translation of an oncogene, a reduction
in the quantity or function of that miRNA will lead to overproduction
of the oncogene product. Such relationships have been established by
miRNA pro/uniFB01ling of several human tumors. For example, down-
regulation or deletion of certain miRNAs in some leukemias and
lymphomas results in increased expression ofBCL2,an antiapoptotic
gene. Dysregulation of other miRNAs that control the expression of
theRASandMYConcogenes has also been detected in lung tumors
and in certain B-cell leukemias, respectively.
Epigenetic Modifications and Cancer
You will recall fromChapter 4that epigenetics refers to reversible,
heritable changes in gene expression that occur without mutation.
Such changes involve posttranslational modi/uniFB01cations of histones and
DNA methylation, both of which affect gene expression. In normal,
differentiated cells, a large portion of the genome is not expressed.
These regions of the genome are silenced by DNA methylation and
histone modi/uniFB01cations. On the other hand, cancer cells are character-
ized by global DNA hypomethylation and selective promoter-localized
hypermethylation. Indeed, it has become evident that tumor sup-
pressor genes are sometimes silenced by hypermethylation of pro-
moter sequences, rather than by mutation. In addition, genome-wide
hypomethylation has been shown to cause chromosomal instability
and to induce tumors in mice. Thus, epigenetic changes may in/uniFB02uence
carcinogenesis in many ways. As an added wrinkle, deep sequencing of
cancer genomes has identi /uniFB01ed mutations in genes that regulate
epigenetic modi/uniFB01cations in many cancers. Thus, certain genetic
changes in cancers may be selected because they lead to epigenetic
alterations (e.g., DNA methylation and histone modi /uniFB01cations) that
favor cancer growth and survival.
CARCINOGENESIS: A MULTISTEP PROCESS
Carcinogenesis is a multistep process resulting from the accumu-
lation of multiple genetic alterations that collectively give rise to the
transformed phenotype and all of its associated hallmarks,discussed
later. As mentioned earlier, the presence of driver mutations in some
nonneoplastic precursor lesions suggests the need for additional mu-
tations for transition to a full-blown cancer and thus supports this
model.
Beyond tumor initiation from a single founding cell, it is
important to recognize that cancers continue to undergo Darwinian
selection and therefore continue to evolve ( Fig. 6.14).It is well
established that during their course cancers generally become more
aggressive and acquire greater malignant potential, a phenomenon
referred to astumor progression.At the molecular level, tumor pro-
gression most likely results from mutations that accumulate inde-
pendently in different cells. Some of these mutations may be lethal, but
others may affect the function of cancer genes, thereby making the
affected cells more adept at growth, survival, invasion, metastasis, or
immune evasion. Due to this selective advantage, subclones that ac-
quire these mutations may come to dominate one area of a tumor,
either at the primary site or at sites of metastasis. As a result of
continuing mutation and Darwinian selection, even though ma-
lignant tumors are monoclonal in origin they are typically geneti-
cally heterogeneous by the time of their clinical presentation. In
advanced tumors exhibiting genetic instability, the extent of genetic
heterogeneity may be enormous.
Genetic evolution shaped by Darwinian selection can explain
the two most pernicious properties of cancers: the tendency over
time for cancers to become both more aggressive and less
responsive to therapy.Thus, genetic heterogeneity has implications
not only for cancer progression but also for response to therapy.
Experience has shown that when tumors recur after chemotherapy,
the recurrent tumor is almost always resistant to the original drug
regimen if it is given again. Experimental data suggest that this
acquired resistance stems from the outgrowth of subclones that have,
by chance, mutations (or epigenetic alterations) that confer drug
resistance.
Healthy cell
Carcinogen-induced
mutation
Additional driver
mutations
First driver
mutation
Passenger
mutations
Additional mutations,
emergence of
subclones
Accumulation of driver and
passenger mutations
Initiated precursor with
stem-cell−like properties
Initiating mutation Acquisition of
cancer hallmarks
Further genetic
evolution
Founding
cancer cell
Genetically
heterogeneous
cancer
Diagnosis
FIG. 6.14Development of cancer through stepwise accumulation of complementary driver mutations. The
order in which various driver mutations occur is usually unknown and may vary from tumor to tumor.
CHAPTER 6Neoplasia 199
ŞEKİL 6.14 Tamamlayıcı sürücü mutasyonlarının kademeli birikimi yoluyla 
kanserin gelişimi. Çeşitli sürücü mutasyonlarının meydana gelme sırası 
genellikle bilinmemektedir ve tümörden tümöre değişebilir.
40. KlinikÇıkarımlar–MolekülerOnkoloji
•Kansertedavisinde:
–Hedefeyöneliktedaviler:
• BCR-ABL, ERBB2 (HER2), BRAF V600E vb.
–İmmünkontrolnoktasıinhibitörleri:
• ProgramlanmışHücreÖlümü1 (PD-1), ProgramlanmışHücreÖlümüLigandı1 (PD-L1), 
SitotoksikT LenfositAntijeni4 (CTLA-4) blokajı
•Tanıda:
–Molekülerprofilleme:
• Sürücümutasyonlarıntanımlanması
• Prognozveyanıtöngörüsü
•Karsinojenezbilgisininrolü:
–Hem tanıhem tedaviseçimindeartıkmerkezikonumdadır
41. Ders 16 –Özet
•Kanserinmolekülertemeli:
–Onkogenler, tümörbaskılayıcıgenler, apoptozvemikroçevregenleri
•Genetiklezyonlar:
–Noktamutasyon, translokasyon, delesyon, amplifikasyon, anöploidi
•Epigenetik vemikroRNA:
–Gen ekspresyonundageridönüşümlüama kalıcıdeğişiklikler
•Genomikinstabilite:
–DNA onarımkusurları, yüksekmutasyonyükü
•Karsinojenler:
–Kimyasal, fiziksel, viral vebakteriyelajanlar
•Karsinogenez:
–Çokaşamalı, Darwinciseçilimvetümörilerlemesiileşekillenir
KAYNAKÇA
METİN
•Robbins& Kumar Basic Pathology(11. Baskı)
RESİMLER
1.Robbins& Kumar Basic Pathology(11. Baskı)